
PREAMBLE 
THE  EUROPEAN  UNION  AND  THE  EUROPEAN  ATOMIC  ENERGY  COMMUNITY 
AND  THE  UNITED  KINGDOM  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  NORTHERN  IRELAND, 

HAVE  AGREED  AS  FOLLOWS: 
    
PART  ONE 
COMMON  PROVISIONS 
Article  1 
Objective 
This  Agreement  sets  out  the  arrangements  for  the  withdrawal  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain 
and  Northern  Ireland  ("United  Kingdom")  from  the  European  Union  (“Union”)  and  from  the  European 
Atomic  Energy  Community  (“Euratom”). 
Article  2 
Definitions 
For  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply: 
(a)   "Union  law"  means: 
(i)  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  ("TEU"),  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the 
European  Union  ("TFEU")  and  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Atomic  Energy 
Community  ("Euratom  Treaty"),  as  amended  or  supplemented,  as  well  as  the 
Treaties  of  Accession  and  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union, 
together  referred  to  as  “the  Treaties”; 
(ii)   the  general  principles  of  Union  law;  
(iii)  the  acts  adopted  by  the  institutions,  bodies,  offices  or  agencies  of  the  Union; 
(iv)  the  international  agreements  to  which  the  Union  is  party  and  the  international 
agreements  concluded  by  the  Member  States  acting  on  behalf  of  the  Union;  
(v)   the  agreements  between  Member  States  entered  into  in  their  capacity  as  Member 
States  of  the  Union;  
(vi)  acts  of  the  Representatives  of  the  Governments  of  the  Member  States  meeting 
within  the  European  Council  or  the  Council  of  the  European  Union  ("Council"); 
(vii)   the  declarations  made  in  the  context  of  intergovernmental  conferences  which 
adopted  the  Treaties; 
(b)  "Member  States"  means  the  Kingdom  of  Belgium,  the  Republic  of  Bulgaria,  the  Czech 
Republic,  the  Kingdom  of  Denmark,  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany,  the  Republic  of 
Estonia,  Ireland,  the  Hellenic  Republic,  the  Kingdom  of  Spain,  the  French  Republic,  the 
Republic  of  Croatia,  the  Italian  Republic,  the  Republic  of  Cyprus,  the  Republic  of  Latvia,  the 
Republic  of  Lithuania,  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxembourg,  Hungary,  the  Republic  of  Malta,  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,  the  Republic  of  Austria,  the  Republic  of  Poland,  the  Portuguese 
Republic,  Romania,  the  Republic  of  Slovenia,  the  Slovak  Republic,  the  Republic  of  Finland  and 
the  Kingdom  of  Sweden; 
(c)  "Union  citizen"  means  any  person  holding  the  nationality  of  a  Member  State; 
(d)  "United  Kingdom  national"  means  a  national  of  the  United  Kingdom,  as  defined  in  the  New 
Declaration  by  the  Government  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland     
of  31  December  1982  on  the  definition  of  the  term  ‘nationals’ 1  together  with  Declaration  No 
63  annexed  to  the  Final  Act  of  the  intergovernmental  conference  which  adopted  the  Treaty 
of  Lisbon 2 ; 
(e)  “transition  period”  means  the  period  provided  in  Article  121. 
Article  3 
Territorial  scope * 
1.   Unless  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement  or  in  Union  law  made  applicable  by  this  Agreement, 
any  reference  in  this  Agreement  to  the  United  Kingdom  or  its  territory,  shall  be  understood  as 
referring  to: 
(a)   the  United  Kingdom; 
(b)  Gibraltar  to  the  extent  that  Union  law  was  applicable  to  it  before  the  date  of  entry  into 
force  of  this  Agreement; 
(c)  the  Channel  Islands  and  the  Isle  of  Man,  to  the  extent  that  Union  law  was  applicable  to 
them  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement; 
(d)  the  Sovereign  Base  Areas  of  Akrotiri  and  Dhekelia  in  Cyprus  to  the  extent  necessary  to 
ensure  the  implementation  of  the  arrangements  set  out  in  the  Protocol  on  the  Sovereign 
Base  Areas  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  in  Cyprus 
annexed  to  the  Act  concerning  the  conditions  of  accession  of  the  Czech  Republic,  the 
Republic  of  Estonia,  the  Republic  of  Cyprus,  the  Republic  of  Latvia,  the  Republic  of 
Lithuania,  the  Republic  of  Hungary,  the  Republic  of  Malta,  the  Republic  of  Poland,  the 
Republic  of  Slovenia  and  the  Slovak  Republic  to  the  European  Union; 
(e)  the  overseas  countries  and  territories  listed  in  Annex  II  to  the  TFEU  having  special 
relations  with  the  United  Kingdom 3 ,  where  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  relate  to  the 
special  arrangements  for  the  association  of  the  overseas  countries  and  territories  with 
the  Union. 
2.   Unless  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement  or  in  Union  law  made  applicable  by  this  Agreement, 
any  reference  in  this  Agreement  to  Member  States,  or  their  territory,  shall  be  understood  as 
covering  the  territories  of  the  Member  States  to  which  the  Treaties  apply  as  provided  in  Article 
355  TFEU. 
 
*  
It  is  recalled  that  the  territorial  scope  of  the  Withdrawal  Agreement,  including  as  regards  the 
transition  period,  should  fully  respect  paragraphs  4  and  24  of  the  European  Council  guidelines  of  29 
April  2017,  notably  as  regards  Gibraltar. 
3  
Anguilla,  Cayman  Islands,  Falkland  Islands,  South  Georgia  and  the  South  Sandwich  Islands,  Montserrat, 
Pitcairn,  Saint  Helena,  Ascension  and  Tristan  da  Cunha,  British  Antarctic  Territory,  British  Indian  Ocean 
Territory,  Turks  and  Caicos  Islands,  British  Virgin  Islands  and  Bermuda. 
5       
5      
Article  4 
Methods  and  principles  relating  to  the  effect,  the  implementation  and  the  application  of  this 
Agreement 
1. Where  this  Agreement  provides  for  the  application  of  Union  law  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  shall 
produce  in  respect  of  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  same  legal  effects  as  those  which  it 
produces  within  the  Union  and  its  Member  States. 
In  particular,  Union  citizens  and  United  Kingdom  nationals  shall  be  able  to  rely  directly  on  the 
provisions  contained  or  referred  to  in  Part  Two.  Any  provisions  inconsistent  or  incompatible  with 
that  Part  shall  be  disapplied. *  
2. The  United  Kingdom  shall  ensure  compliance  with  paragraph  1,  including  as  regards  the  required 
powers  of  its  judicial  and  administrative  authorities,  through  domestic  primary  legislation. 
3. The  provisions  of  this  Agreement  referring  to  concepts  or  provisions  of  Union  law  shall  be 
interpreted  and  applied  in  accordance  with  the  same  methods  and  general  principles  as  those 
applicable  within  the  Union. 
4. The  provisions  of  this  Agreement  referring  to  Union  law  or  concepts  or  provisions  thereof  shall  in 
their  implementation  and  application  be  interpreted  in  conformity  with  the  relevant  case  law  of 
the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  handed  down  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
5. In  the  interpretation  and  application  of  this  Agreement,  the  United  Kingdom's  judicial  and 
administrative  authorities  shall  have  due  regard  to  relevant  case  law  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the 
European  Union  handed  down  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period.  
Article  4a 
Good  faith 
The  Parties  shall,  in  full  mutual  respect  and  good  faith,  assist  each  other  in  carrying  out  tasks  which 
flow  from  this  Agreement. 
They  shall  take  all  appropriate  measures,  whether  general  or  particular,  to  ensure  fulfilment  of  the 
obligations  arising  from  this  Agreement  and  shall  refrain  from  any  measures  which  could  jeopardise 
the  attainment  of  the  objectives  of  this  Agreement.  
This  Article  is  without  prejudice  to  the  application  of  Union  law  pursuant  to  this  Agreement,  in 
particular  the  principle  of  sincere  cooperation. 
Article  5 
References  to  Union  law 
1. With  the  exception  of  Parts  Four  and  Five,  unless  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement  all 
references  in  this  Agreement  to  Union  law  shall  be  understood  as  references  to  Union  law, 
including  as  amended  or  replaced,  as  applicable  on  the  last  day  of  the  transition  period. 
2. Where  in  this  Agreement  reference  is  made  to  Union  acts  or  provisions  thereof,  such  reference 
shall,  where  relevant,  be  understood  to  include  a  reference  to  Union  law  or  provisions  thereof 
                                                            
*  
The  content  of  Article  4  is  agreed  in  its  entirety  in  relation  to  Part  Two  of  this  Agreement. 
6       
6      
that,  although  replaced  or  superseded  by  the  act  referred  to,  continue  to  apply  in  accordance 
with  that  act. 
3. For  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  references  to  provisions  of  Union  law  made  applicable  by 
this  Agreement  shall  be  understood  to  include  references  to  the  relevant  Union  acts 
supplementing  or  implementing  those  provisions. 
Article  6 
References  to  the  Union  and  to  Member  States 
1.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  all  references  to  Member  States  and  competent  authorities 
of  Member  States  in  provisions  of  Union  law  made  applicable  by  this  Agreement  shall  be  read  as 
including  the  United  Kingdom  and  its  competent  authorities,  except  as  regards:  
(a)   the  nomination,  appointment  or  election  of  members  of  the  institutions,  bodies,  offices 
and  agencies  of  the  Union,  as  well  as  the  participation  in  the  decision-­‐making  and  the 
attendance  in  the  meetings  of  the  institutions; 
(b)  the  participation  in  the  decision-­‐making  and  governance  of  the  bodies,  offices  and 
agencies  of  the  Union; 
(c)  the  attendance  in  the  meetings  of  the  committees  referred  to  in  Article  3(2)  of 
Regulation  (EU)  No  182/2011  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 4 ,  of 
Commission  expert  groups  or  of  other  similar  entities,  or  in  the  meetings  of  expert 
groups  or  similar  entities  of  bodies,  offices  and  agencies  of  the  Union,  unless  otherwise 
provided  in  this  Agreement.  
2.  Unless  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement,  any  reference  to  the  Union  shall  be  read  as 
including  Euratom. 
Article  7 
Access  to  network  and  information  systems  and  data  bases 
Unless  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement,  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  cease  to  be  entitled  to  access  any  network,  any  information  system,  and  any  database 
established  on  the  basis  of  Union  law.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  take  appropriate  measures  to 
ensure  that  it  does  not  access  a  network,  information  system,  or  database  which  it  is  no  longer 
entitled  to  access. 
  
                                                            
4  
Regulation  (EU)  No  182/2011  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  16  February  2011 
laying  down  the  rules  and  general  principles  concerning  mechanisms  for  control  by  Member  States  of 
the  Commission’s  exercise  of  implementing  powers  (OJ  L55,  28.2.2011,  p.  13). 
7       
7      
PART  TWO 
CITIZENS’  RIGHTS 
TITLE  I 
GENERAL  PROVISIONS 
Article  8 
Definitions 
For  the  purposes  of  this  Part,  and  without  prejudice  to  Title  III,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply: 
(a)   "family  members"  means: 
(i)  family  members  of  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  as  defined  in  point  (2) 
of  Article  2  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 5 ; 
(ii)   persons  other  than  those  defined  in  Article  3(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  whose 
presence  is  required  by  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  in  order  not  to 
deprive  them  of  a  right  of  residence  granted  by  this  Part; 
irrespective  of  their  nationality  and  who  fall  within  the  personal  scope  provided  for  in  Article 
9  of  this  Agreement;  
(b)  "frontier  workers"  means  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  who  pursue  an 
economic  activity  in  accordance  with  Article  45  or  49  TFEU  in  one  or  more  States  in  which 
they  do  not  reside; 
(c)  "host  State"  means: 
(i)    in  respect  of  Union  citizens,  the  United  Kingdom  if  they  exercised  there  their  right  of 
residence  in  accordance  with  Union  law  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and 
continue  to  reside  there  thereafter;  
(ii)   in  respect  of  United  Kingdom  nationals,  the  Member  State  in  which  they  exercised 
their  right  of  residence  in  accordance  with  Union  law  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  and  continue  to  reside  there  thereafter; 
(d)  "State  of  work"  means: 
(i)  in  respect  of  Union  citizens,  the  United  Kingdom,  if  they  pursued  an  economic 
activity  as  frontier  workers  there  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and 
continue  to  do  so  thereafter; 
(ii)   in  respect  of  United  Kingdom  nationals,  a  Member  State  where  they  pursued  an 
economic  activity  as  frontier  workers  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and 
continue  to  do  so  thereafter; 
                                                            
5  
Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  29  April  2004  on  the  right  of 
citizens  of  the  Union  and  their  family  members  to  move  and  reside  freely  within  the  territory  of  the 
Member  States  amending  Regulation  (EEC)  No  1612/68  and  repealing  Directives  64/221/EEC, 
68/360/EEC,  72/194/EEC,  73/148/EEC,  75/34/EEC,  75/35/EEC,  90/364/EEC,  90/365/EEC  and 
93/96/EEC  (OJ  L  158,  30.4.2004,  p.  77). 
8       
8      
(e)  "rights  of  custody"  means  rights  of  custody  within  the  meaning  of  point  (9)  of  Article  2  of 
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  2201/2003 6 ,  including  rights  of  custody  acquired  by  judgment,  by 
operation  of  law  or  by  an  agreement  having  legal  effect. 
Article  9 
Personal  scope 
1.   Without  prejudice  to  Title  III,  this  Part  shall  apply  to  the  following  persons:  
(a)   Union  citizens  who  exercised  their  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance 
with  Union  law  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  continue  to  reside  there 
thereafter;  
(b)  United  Kingdom  nationals  who  exercised  their  right  to  reside  in  a  Member  State  in 
accordance  with  Union  law  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  continue  to 
reside  there  thereafter;  
(c)  Union  citizens  who  exercised  their  right  as  frontier  workers  in  the  United  Kingdom  in 
accordance  with  Union  law  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  continue  to  do  so 
thereafter;  
(d)  United  Kingdom  nationals  who  exercised  their  right  as  frontier  workers  in  one  or  more 
Member  States  in  accordance  with  Union  law  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and 
continue  to  do  so  thereafter;  
(e)  family  members  of  the  persons  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to  (d),  where  they  fulfil  one  of 
the  following  conditions: 
(i)  they  resided  in  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  Union  law  before  the  end  of 
the  transition  period  and  continue  to  reside  there  thereafter; 
(ii)   they  were  directly  related  to  a  person  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to  (d)  of  this 
paragraph  and  resided  outside  the  host  State  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period,  provided  that  they  fulfil  the  conditions  set  out  in  point  (2)  of  Article  2  of 
Directive  2004/38/EC  at  the  time  they  seek  residence  under  this  Part  in  order  to 
join  the  person  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to  (d)  of  this  paragraph; 
(iii)  they  are  born  to,  or  legally  adopted  by,  persons  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to  (d) 
after  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  whether  inside  or  outside  the  host  State, 
where  they  fulfil  the  conditions  set  out  in  point  (2)(c)  of  Article  2  of  Directive 
2004/38/EC  at  the  time  they  seek  residence  under  this  Part  in  order  to  join  the 
person  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to  (d)  of  this  paragraph  and  fulfil  one  of  the 
following  conditions: 
 -­‐   both  parents  are  persons  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to  (d); 
 -­‐   one  parent  is  a  person  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to  (d)  and  the  other  is  a 
national  of  the  host  State;  or 
                                                            
6  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  2201/2003  of  27  November  2003  concerning  jurisdiction  and  the 
recognition  and  enforcement  of  judgments  in  matrimonial  matters  and  the  matters  of  parental 
responsibility  (OJ  L  338,  23/12/2003  p.  1). 
9       
9      
 -­‐   one  parent  is  a  person  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to  (d)  and  has  sole  or  joint 
rights  of  custody  of  the  child,  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  rules  of 
family  law  of  a  Member  State  or  of  the  United  Kingdom,  including  applicable 
rules  of  private  international  law  under  which  rights  of  custody  established 
under  the  law  of  a  third  state  are  recognised  in  the  Member  State  or  in  the 
United  Kingdom,  in  particular  as  regards  the  best  interests  of  the  child  and 
without  prejudice  to  the  normal  operation  of  such  applicable  rules  of  private 
international  law 7 ; 
(f)   family  members  who  resided  in  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  Articles  12  and  13, 
Article  16(2)  and  Articles  17  and  18  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  and  continue  to  reside  there  thereafter. 
2.  Persons  falling  under  points  (a)  and  (b)  of  Article  3(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  whose  residence 
was  facilitated  by  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  its  national  legislation  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  in  accordance  with  Article  3(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  shall  retain  their  right  of 
residence  in  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  this  Part  provided  they  continue  to  reside  in  the 
host  State  thereafter. 
3.  Paragraph  2  also  applies  to  persons  falling  under  points  (a)  and  (b)  of  Article  3(2)  of  Directive 
2004/38/EC  who  have  applied  for  facilitation  of  entry  and  residence  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period,  and  whose  residence  is  facilitated  by  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  its 
national  legislation  after  that  date. 
4.  Without  prejudice  to  any  right  to  residence  which  the  persons  concerned  may  have  in  their  own 
right,  the  host  State  shall,  in  accordance  with  its  national  legislation  and  in  accordance  with  point 
(b)  of  Article  3(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC,  facilitate  entry  and  residence  for  the  partner  with 
whom  the  person  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to  (d)  has  a  durable  relationship,  duly  attested,  and 
who  resided  outside  the  host  State  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  provided  that  the 
relationship  was  durable  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  continues  at  the  time  the 
partner  seeks  residence  under  this  Part. 
5.  In  the  cases  referred  to  in  paragraphs  3  and  4,  the  host  State  shall  undertake  an  extensive 
examination  of  the  personal  circumstances  and  shall  justify  any  denial  of  entry  or  residence  to 
such  persons. 
Article  10 
Continuity  of  residence 
Continuity  of  residence  for  the  purposes  of  Articles  8  and  9  shall  not  be  affected  by  absences  as 
referred  to  in  Article  14(2). 
The  right  of  permanent  residence  acquired  under  Directive  2004/38/EC  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  shall  not  be  treated  as  lost  through  absence  from  the  host  State  for  a  period 
specified  in  Article  14(3). 
                                                            
7  
The  notion  of  rights  of  custody  is  to  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  point  (9)  of  Article  2  of  Council 
Regulation  (EC)  No  2201/2003  of  27  November  2003  concerning  jurisdiction  and  the  recognition  and 
enforcement  of  judgments  in  matrimonial  matters  and  the  matters  of  parental  responsibility. 
Therefore,  it  covers  rights  of  custody  acquired  by  judgment,  by  operation  of  law  or  by  an  agreement 
having  legal  effect. 
10      
10     
Article  11 
Non-­‐discrimination 
Within  the  scope  of  this  Part  and  without  prejudice  to  any  special  provisions  contained  therein,  any 
discrimination  on  grounds  of  nationality  within  the  meaning  of  the  first  subparagraph  of  Article  18 
TFEU  shall  be  prohibited  in  the  host  State  and  the  State  of  work  in  respect  of  the  persons  referred  to 
in  Article  9  of  this  Agreement. 
  
11      
11     
TITLE  II 
RIGHTS  AND  OBLIGATIONS 
CHAPTER  1 
Rights  related  to  residence,  residence  documents 
Article  12 
Residence  rights 
1.  Union  citizens  and  United  Kingdom  nationals  shall  have  the  right  to  reside  in  the  host  State  under 
the  limitations  and  conditions  as  set  out  in  Articles  21,  45  or  49  TFEU  and  in  Article  6(1),  Article 
7(1)(a),  (b)  or  (c),  Article  7(3),  Article  14,  Article  16(1)  or  Article  17(1)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC.  
2.  Family  members  who  are  either  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  shall  have  the  right 
to  reside  in  the  host  State  as  set  out  in  Article  21  TFEU  and  in  Article  6(1),  Article  7(1)(d),  Article 
12(1)  or  (3),  Article  13(1),  Article  14,  Article  16(1)  or  Article  17(3)  and  (4)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC, 
subject  to  the  limitations  and  conditions  set  out  in  those  provisions. 
3.  Family  members  who  are  neither  Union  citizens  nor  United  Kingdom  nationals  shall  have  the 
right  to  reside  in  the  host  State  under  Article  21  TFEU  and  as  set  out  in  Article  6(2),  Article  7(2), 
Article  12(2)  or  (3),  Article  13(2),  Article  14,  Article  16(2),  Article  17(3)  or  (4)  or  Article  18  of 
Directive  2004/38/EC,  subject  to  the  limitations  and  conditions  set  out  in  those  provisions. 
4.   The  host  State  may  not  impose  any  limitations  and  conditions  other  than  those  provided  for  in 
this  Title  on  the  persons  referred  to  in  paragraphs  1,  2  and  3  for  obtaining,  retaining  or  losing 
residence  rights.  There  shall  be  no  discretion  in  applying  the  limitations  and  conditions,  other 
than  in  favour  of  the  person  concerned. 
Article  13 
Right  of  exit  and  of  entry 
1.  Union  citizens,  United  Kingdom  nationals,  their  respective  family  members  and  other  persons, 
residing  in  its  territory  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  set  out  in  this  Title  shall  have  the  right 
to  leave  the  host  State  and  the  right  to  enter  it  as  set  out  in  Articles  4(1)  and  5(1)  first  paragraph 
of  Directive  2004/38/EC  with  a  valid  passport  or  national  identity  card  for  Union  citizens  and 
United  Kingdom  nationals,  and  a  valid  passport  for  their  respective  family  members  who  are  not 
Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals. 
After  five  years  following  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  the  host  State  may  decide  no  longer  to 
accept  a  national  identity  card  to  enter  or  exit  its  territory,  if  the  respective  national  identity  card 
does  not  include  a  chip  compliant  with  the  applicable  International  Civil  Aviation  Organisation 
standards  related  to  biometric  identification.  
2.  No  exit  or  entry  visa  or  equivalent  formality  shall  be  required  for  holders  of  a  valid  document 
issued  in  accordance  with  Article  17  or  24  of  this  Agreement. 
3.   Where  the  host  State  requires  family  members  who  join  the  Union  citizen  or  the  United  Kingdom 
national  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  to  have  an  entry  visa,  the  host  State  shall  grant 
such  persons  every  facility  to  obtain  the  necessary  visas.  Such  visas  shall  be  issued  free  of  charge 
as  soon  as  possible  and  on  the  basis  of  an  accelerated  procedure. 
12      
12     
Article  14 
Right  of  permanent  residence 
1.   Union  citizens,  United  Kingdom  nationals,  and  their  respective  family  members,  who  have 
resided  legally  in  accordance  with  Union  law  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  in  the  host 
State,  or  for  the  duration  specified  in  Article  17  of  Directive  2004/38/EC,  shall  have  the  right  to 
reside  permanently  in  the  host  State  under  the  conditions  set  out  in  Articles  16,  17  and  18  of 
Directive  2004/38/EC.  Periods  of  legal  residence  or  work  in  accordance  with  Union  law  before 
and  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  shall  be  included  in  the  calculation  of  the  qualifying 
period  necessary  for  acquisition  of  the  right  of  permanent  residence. 
2.   Continuity  of  residence  for  the  purposes  of  acquisition  of  the  right  of  permanent  residence  shall 
be  determined  in  accordance  with  Article  16(3)  and  Article  21  of  Directive  2004/38/EC. 
3.   Once  acquired,  the  right  of  permanent  residence  shall  be  lost  only  through  absence  from  the 
host  State  for  a  period  exceeding  five  consecutive  years. 
Article  15 
Accumulation  of  periods 
Union  citizens,  United  Kingdom  nationals,  and  their  respective  family  members,  who  before  the  end 
of  the  transition  period  resided  legally  in  the  host  State  under  the  conditions  of  Article  7  of  Directive 
2004/38/EC  for  a  period  of  less  than  five  years,  shall  have  the  right  to  acquire  the  right  to  reside 
permanently  under  the  conditions  set  out  in  Article  14  of  this  Agreement  once  they  have  completed 
the  necessary  periods  of  residence.  Periods  of  legal  residence  or  work  in  accordance  with  Union  law 
before  and  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  shall  be  included  in  the  calculation  of  the  qualifying 
period  necessary  for  acquisition  of  the  right  of  permanent  residence. 
Article  16 
Status  and  changes 
1.   The  right  of  Union  citizens,  United  Kingdom  nationals  and  their  respective  family  members  to 
rely  directly  on  this  Part  shall  not  be  affected  when  they  change  status,  for  example  between 
student,  worker,  self-­‐employed  person  and  economically  inactive  person.  Persons  who,  at  the 
end  of  the  transition  period,  enjoy  a  right  of  residence  in  their  capacity  as  family  members  of 
Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  cannot  become  persons  referred  to  in  points  (a)  to 
(d)  of  Article  9(1). 
2.   The  rights  provided  for  in  this  Title  for  the  family  members,  who  are  dependent  on  Union  citizens 
or  United  Kingdom  nationals  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  shall  be  maintained  even 
after  they  cease  to  be  dependent. 
Article  17 
Issuance  of  residence  documents 
1.   The  host  State  may  require  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals,  their  respective  family 
members  and  other  persons,  residing  in  its  territory  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  set  out  in 
this  Title,  to  apply  for  a  new  residence  status  which  confers  the  rights  under  this  Title  and  a 
document  evidencing  such  status  which  may  be  in  a  digital  form. 
13      
13     
Applying  for  such  a  residence  status  shall  be  subject  to  the  following  conditions: 
(a)   the  purpose  of  the  application  procedure  shall  be  to  verify  whether  the  applicant  is 
entitled  to  the  residence  rights  set  out  in  this  Title.  Where  that  is  the  case,  the  applicant 
shall  have  a  right  to  be  granted  the  residence  status  and  the  document  evidencing  it; 
(b)  the  deadline  for  submitting  the  application  shall  not  be  less  than  6  months  from  the  end 
of  the  transition  period  for  persons  residing  in  the  host  State  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period.  
The  deadline  for  persons  who  have  the  right  to  commence  residence  in  the  host  State  in 
accordance  with  this  Part  shall  be  3  months  after  their  arrival  or  expiry  of  the  deadline 
referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph,  whichever  is  later. 
A  certificate  of  application  for  the  residence  status  shall  be  issued  immediately; 
(c)  the  deadline  for  submitting  the  application  referred  to  in  point  (b)  shall  be  extended 
automatically  by  one  year  where  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom  has  notified  the 
United  Kingdom  or  the  Union,  respectively,  that  technical  problems  prevent  the  host 
State  either  from  registering  the  application  or  from  issuing  the  certificate  of  application 
referred  to  in  point  (b).  The  host  State  shall  publish  that  notification  and  shall  provide 
appropriate  public  information  for  the  citizens  or  nationals  concerned  in  good  time; 
(d)  where  the  deadline  for  submitting  the  application  referred  to  in  point  (b)  is  not 
respected  by  the  persons  concerned,  the  competent  authorities  shall  assess  all  the 
circumstances  and  reasons  for  not  respecting  the  deadline  and  allow  those  persons  to 
submit  an  application  within  a  reasonable  further  period  of  time,  where  there  are 
reasonable  grounds  for  the  failure  to  respect  the  deadline; 
(e)  the  host  State  shall  ensure  that  administrative  procedures  for  applications  are  smooth, 
transparent  and  simple  and  that  any  unnecessary  administrative  burdens  are  avoided; 
(f)   application  forms  shall  be  short,  simple,  user  friendly  and  adjusted  to  the  context  of  this 
Agreement;  applications  made  by  families  at  the  same  time  shall  be  considered  together; 
(g)   the  document  evidencing  the  status  shall  be  issued  free  of  charge  or  for  a  charge  not 
exceeding  that  imposed  on  citizens  or  nationals  for  the  issuing  of  similar  documents; 
(h)  persons  who,  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  are  holders  of  a  valid  permanent 
residence  document  issued  under  Article  19  or  20  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  or  a  valid 
domestic  immigration  document  conferring  a  permanent  right  to  reside  in  the  host  State, 
shall  have  the  right  to  exchange  that  document  within  the  period  referred  to  in  point 
(b)for  a  new  residence  document  upon  application  after  a  verification  of  their  identity,  a 
criminality  and  security  check  in  accordance  with  point  (p)  of  this  paragraph  and 
confirmation  of  ongoing  residence;  such  a  document  shall  be  free  of  charge; 
(i)  the  identity  of  the  applicants  shall  be  verified  through  the  presentation  of  a  valid 
passport  or  national  identity  card  for  Union  citizens  and  United  Kingdom  nationals,  and  a 
valid  passport  for  their  respective  family  members  who  are  not  Union  citizens  or  United 
Kingdom  nationals;  the  acceptance  of  such  identity  documents  shall  not  be  made 
conditional  upon  any  criteria  other  than  that  of  validity.  Where  the  identity  document  is 
retained  by  the  competent  authorities  of  the  host  State  while  the  application  is  pending, 
the  host  State  shall  return  that  document  upon  application  without  delay  and  before  the 
decision  on  the  application  is  taken; 
14      
14     
(j)  supporting  documents  other  than  identity  documents,  such  as  civil  status  documents, 
may  be  submitted  in  copy.  Originals  of  supporting  document  can  be  required  only  in 
specific  cases  where  there  is  a  reasonable  doubt  as  to  the  authenticity  of  the  supporting 
documents  submitted; 
(k)   the  host  State  may  only  require  Union  citizens  and  United  Kingdom  nationals  to  present, 
in  addition  to  the  identity  documents  referred  to  in  point  (i)  of  this  paragraph,  the 
following  supporting  documents  as  referred  to  in  Article  8(3)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC: 
(i)  where  they  reside  in  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  Article  7(1)(a)  of  Directive 
2004/38/EC  as  workers  or  self-­‐employed,  a  confirmation  of  engagement  from 
the  employer  or  a  certificate  of  employment,  or  proof  that  they  are  self-­‐
employed; 
(ii)   where  they  reside  in  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  Article  7(1)(b)  of  Directive 
2004/38/EC  as  economically  inactive  persons,  evidence  that  they  have  sufficient 
resources  for  themselves  and  their  family  members  not  to  become  a  burden  on 
the  social  assistance  system  of  the  host  State  during  their  period  of  residence 
and  have  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover  in  the  host  State; 
(iii)  where  they  reside  in  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  Article  7(1)(c)  of  Directive 
2004/38/EC  as  students,  proof  of  enrolment  at  an  establishment  accredited  or 
financed  by  the  host  State  on  the  basis  of  its  legislation  or  administrative 
practice,  and  of  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover  and  a  declaration  or 
equivalent,  that  they  have  sufficient  resources  for  themselves  and  their  family 
members  not  to  become  a  burden  on  the  social  assistance  system  of  the  host 
State  during  their  period  of  residence.  The  host  State  may  not  require  this 
declaration  to  refer  to  any  specific  amount  of  resources. 
With  regard  to  the  condition  of  sufficient  resources,  Article  8(4)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC 
shall  apply; 
(l)  the  host  State  may  only  require  family  members  who  fall  under  Articles  9(1)(e)(i),  9(2)  or 
9(3)  of  this  Agreement  and  who  reside  in  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  Article  7(1)(d) 
or  7(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  to  present,  in  addition  to  the  identity  documents 
referred  to  in  point  (i)  of  this  paragraph,  the  following  supporting  documents  as  referred 
to  in  Articles  8(5)  or  10(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC: 
(i)  a  document  attesting  to  the  existence  of  a  family  relationship  or  of  a  registered 
partnership; 
(ii)   the  registration  certificate  or,  in  the  absence  of  a  registration  system,  any  other 
proof  of  residence  in  the  host  State  of  the  Union  citizen  or  of  the  United 
Kingdom  nationals  with  whom  they  reside  in  the  host  State; 
(iii)  for  direct  descendants  who  are  under  the  age  of  21  or  are  dependants  and 
dependent  direct  relatives  in  the  ascending  line,  and  for  those  of  the  spouse  or 
registered  partner,  documentary  evidence  that  the  conditions  set  out  in  Article 
2(2)(c)  or  (d)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  are  fulfilled; 
(iv)  for  the  persons  referred  to  in  Article  9(2)  or  (3)  of  this  Agreement,  a  document 
issued  by  the  relevant  authority  in  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  Article  3(2) 
of  Directive  2004/38/EC. 
15      
15     
With  regard  to  the  condition  of  sufficient  resources  as  concerns  family  members  who  are 
themselves  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals,  Article  8(4)  of  Directive 
2004/38/EC  shall  apply; 
(m)  the  host  State  may  only  require  family  members  who  fall  under  Articles  9(1)(e)(ii)  or  9(4) 
of  this  Agreement,  in  addition  to  the  identity  documents  referred  to  in  point  (i)  of  this 
paragraph,  the  following  supporting  documents  as  referred  to  in  Articles  8(5)  and  10(2) 
of  Directive  2004/38/EC: 
(i)  a  document  attesting  to  the  existence  of  a  family  relationship  or  of  a  registered 
partnership; 
(ii)   the  registration  certificate  or,  in  the  absence  of  a  registration  system,  any  other 
proof  of  residence  in  the  host  State  of  the  Union  citizen  or  of  the  United 
Kingdom  nationals  whom  they  are  joining  in  the  host  State; 
(iii)  for  spouses  or  registered  partners,  a  document  attesting  to  the  existence  of  a 
family  relationship  or  of  a  registered  partnership  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period; 
(iv)  for  direct  descendants  who  are  under  the  age  of  21  or  are  dependants  and 
dependent  direct  relatives  in  the  ascending  line  and  those  of  the  spouse  or 
registered  partner,  documentary  evidence  that  they  were  related  to  Union 
citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and 
fulfil  the  conditions  set  out  in  Article  2(2)(c)  or  (d)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC 
relating  to  age  or  dependence; 
(v)   for  the  persons  referred  to  in  Article  9(4)  of  this  Agreement,  proof  that  a  durable 
relationship  with  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  existed  before  the 
end  of  the  transition  period  and  continues  to  exist  thereafter; 
(n)  for  cases  other  than  those  set  out  in  points  (k),  (l)  and  (m),  the  host  State  shall  not 
require  applicants  to  present  supporting  documents  that  go  beyond  what  is  strictly 
necessary  and  proportionate  to  provide  evidence  that  the  conditions  relating  to  the  right 
of  residence  under  this  Title  have  been  fulfilled; 
(o)   the  competent  authorities  of  the  host  State  shall  help  the  applicants  prove  their 
eligibility  and  avoid  any  errors  or  omissions  in  the  application;  they  shall  give  the 
applicants  the  opportunity  to  furnish  supplementary  evidence  and  to  correct  any 
deficiencies,  errors  or  omission; 
(p)  criminality  and  security  checks  may  be  carried  out  systematically  on  applicants  with  the 
exclusive  aim  of  verifying  whether  restrictions  set  out  in  Article  18  of  this  Agreement 
may  be  applicable.  For  that  purpose,  applicants  may  be  required  to  declare  past  criminal 
convictions  which  appear  in  their  criminal  record  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  the  State 
of  conviction  at  the  time  of  the  application.  The  host  State  may,  should  it  consider  this 
essential,  apply  the  procedure  set  out  in  Article  27(3)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  on 
enquiries  to  other  States  regarding  previous  criminal  records; 
(q)  the  new  residence  document  shall  include  a  statement  that  it  has  been  issued  in 
accordance  with  this  Agreement; 
(r)   the  applicant  shall  have  access  to  judicial  and,  where  appropriate,  administrative  redress 
procedures  in  the  host  State  against  any  decision  refusing  to  grant  the  residence  status. 
16      
16     
The  redress  procedures  shall  allow  for  an  examination  of  the  legality  of  the  decision,  as 
well  as  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  on  which  the  proposed  decision  is  based.  They 
shall  ensure  that  the  decision  is  not  disproportionate. 
2.   During  the  period  referred  to  in  point  (b)  of  paragraph  1  of  this  Article  and  its  possible  one-­‐year 
extension  under  point  (c)  of  paragraph  1  of  this  Article,  all  rights  provided  for  in  this  Part  shall  be 
deemed  to  apply  to  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals,  their  respective  family 
members,  and  other  persons  residing  in  the  host  State  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  and 
subject  to  the  restrictions  set  out  in  Article  18. 
3.  Pending  a  final  decision  by  the  competent  authorities  on  any  application  referred  to  in  paragraph 
1,  as  well  as  a  final  judgment  handed  down  in  case  of  judicial  redress  sought  against  any  rejection 
of  such  application  by  the  competent  administrative  authorities,  all  rights  provided  for  in  this 
Part  shall  be  deemed  to  apply  to  the  applicant,  including  Article  19  on  safeguards  and  right  of 
appeal,  subject  to  the  conditions  set  out  in  Article  18(4). 
4.  Where  a  host  State  has  chosen  not  to  require  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals,  their 
family  members,  and  other  persons,  residing  in  its  territory  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  set 
out  in  this  Title,  to  apply  for  the  new  residence  status  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  as  a  condition 
for  legal  residence,  those  eligible  for  residence  rights  under  this  Title  shall  have  the  right  to 
receive,  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  set  out  in  Directive  2004/38/EC,  a  residence  document 
which  may  be  in  a  digital  form  that  includes  a  statement  that  it  has  been  issued  in  accordance 
with  this  Agreement. 
Article  17a 
Issuance  of  residence  documents  during  the  transition  period 
1.   During  the  transition  period,  a  host  State  may  allow  applications  for  a  residence  status  or  a 
residence  document  as  referred  to  in  Article  17(1)  and  (4)  to  be  made  voluntarily  from  the  date 
of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement. 
2.   A  decision  to  accept  or  refuse  such  an  application  shall  be  taken  in  accordance  with  Article  17(1) 
and  (4).  A  decision  under  Article  17(1)  shall  have  no  effect  until  after  the  end  of  the  transition 
period.  
3.   If  an  application  under  Article  17(1)  is  accepted  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  the  host 
State  may  not  withdraw  the  decision  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  on  any  grounds 
other  than  those  set  out  in  Chapter  VI  and  Article  35  of  Directive  2004/38/EC. 
4.   If  an  application  is  refused  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  the  applicant  may  apply  again 
at  any  time  before  the  expiry  of  the  period  set  out  in  Article  17(1)(b). 
5.   Without  prejudice  to  paragraph  4,  redress  procedures  under  Article  17(1)(r)  shall  be  available 
from  the  date  of  the  decision. 
Article  18 
Restrictions  of  the  right  of  residence 
1.   Conduct  of  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals,  their  family  members  or  other  persons, 
exercising  rights  under  this  Title,  that  occurred  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  shall  be 
considered  in  accordance  with  Chapter  VI  of  Directive  2004/38/EC. 
17      
17     
2.   Conduct  of  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals,  their  family  members  or  other  persons, 
exercising  rights  under  this  Title,  that  occurred  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  may 
constitute  grounds  for  restricting  the  right  of  residence  by  the  host  State  or  the  right  of  entry  in 
the  State  of  work  in  accordance  with  national  legislation. 
3.  The  host  State  or  the  State  of  work  may  adopt  the  necessary  measures  to  refuse,  terminate  or 
withdraw  any  right  conferred  by  this  Title  in  the  case  of  abuse  of  those  rights  or  fraud  as  set  out 
in  Article  35  of  Directive  2004/38/EC.  Such  measures  shall  be  subject  to  the  procedural 
safeguards  provided  for  in  Article  19  of  this  Agreement. 
4.  The  host  State  or  the  State  of  work  may  remove  applicants  who  submitted  fraudulent  or  abusive 
applications  from  its  territory  under  the  conditions  set  out  in  Directive  2004/38/EC,  in  particular 
Articles  31  and  35  thereof,  even  before  a  final  judgment  has  been  handed  down  in  case  of 
judicial  redress  sought  against  any  rejection  of  such  an  application. 
Article  19 
Safeguards  and  right  of  appeal 
The  safeguards  set  out  in  Article  15  and  Chapter  VI  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  shall  apply  in  respect  of 
any  decision  of  the  host  State  that  restricts  residence  rights  of  the  persons  referred  to  in  Article  9  of 
this  Agreement. 
Article  20 
Related  rights 
In  accordance  with  Article  23  of  Directive  2004/38/EC,  irrespective  of  nationality,  the  family 
members  of  a  Union  citizen  or  a  United  Kingdom  national  who  have  the  right  of  residence  or  the 
right  of  permanent  residence  in  the  host  State  or  the  State  of  work  shall  be  entitled  to  take  up 
employment  or  self-­‐employment  there. 
Article  21 
Equal  treatment 
1.  In  accordance  with  Article  24  of  Directive  2004/38/EC,  subject  to  the  specific  provisions  provided 
for  in  Titles  I,  II  and  IV  of  this  Part,  all  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  residing  on  the 
basis  of  this  Agreement  in  the  territory  of  the  host  State  shall  enjoy  equal  treatment  with  the 
nationals  of  that  State  within  the  scope  of  this  Part.  The  benefit  of  this  right  shall  be  extended  to 
family  members  of  Union  citizens  or  of  United  Kingdom  nationals  and  who  have  the  right  of 
residence  or  permanent  residence. 
2.  By  way  of  derogation  from  paragraph  1,  the  host  State  shall  not  be  obliged  to  confer  entitlement 
to  social  assistance  during  residence  in  accordance  with  Articles  6  or  14(4)(b)  of  Directive 
2004/38/EC,  nor  shall  it  be  obliged,  prior  to  acquisition  of  the  right  of  permanent  residence  in 
accordance  with  Article  14  of  this  Agreement,  to  grant  maintenance  aid  for  studies,  including 
vocational  training,  consisting  in  student  grants  or  student  loans  to  persons  other  than  workers, 
self-­‐employed  persons,  persons  who  retain  such  status  and  members  of  their  families. 
18      
18     
CHAPTER  2 
Rights  of  workers  and  self-­‐employed  persons 
Article  22 
Rights  of  workers 
1.   Subject  to  the  limitations  set  out  in  Article  45(3)  and  (4)  TFEU,  workers  in  the  host  State  and 
frontier  workers  in  the  State  or  States  of  work  shall  enjoy  the  rights  guaranteed  by  Article  45 
TFEU  or  granted  by  Regulation  (EU)  No  492/2011  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 8 . 
These  rights  include: 
(a)   the  right  not  to  be  discriminated  against  on  grounds  of  nationality  as  regards 
employment,  remuneration  and  other  conditions  of  work  and  employment; 
(b)  the  right  to  take  up  and  pursue  an  activity  in  accordance  with  the  rules  applicable  to  the 
nationals  of  the  host  State  or  the  State  of  work; 
(c)  the  right  to  assistance  afforded  by  the  employment  offices  of  the  host  State  or  the  State 
of  work  as  offered  to  own  nationals; 
(d)  the  right  to  equal  treatment  in  respect  of  conditions  of  employment  and  work,  in 
particular  as  regards  remuneration,  dismissal  and  in  case  of  unemployment, 
reinstatement  or  re-­‐employment; 
(e)  the  right  to  tax  and  social  advantages; 
(f)   collective  rights; 
(g)   the  rights  and  benefits  accorded  to  national  workers  in  matters  of  housing; 
(h)  the  right  for  their  children  to  be  admitted  to  the  general  educational,  apprenticeship  and 
vocational  training  courses  under  the  same  conditions  as  the  nationals  of  the  host  State 
or  the  State  of  work,  if  such  children  are  residing  in  the  territory  where  the  worker 
works. 
2.   Where  a  direct  descendant  of  a  worker  who  has  ceased  to  reside  in  the  host  State  is  in  education 
in  that  State,  the  primary  carer  for  that  descendant  shall  have  the  right  to  reside  in  that  State 
until  the  descendant  reaches  the  age  of  majority,  and  after  the  age  of  majority  if  that  descendant 
continues  to  need  the  presence  and  care  of  the  primary  carer  in  order  to  pursue  and  complete 
his  or  her  education. 
3.  Employed  frontier  workers  shall  enjoy  the  right  to  enter  and  exit  the  State  of  work  in  accordance 
with  Article  13  and  shall  retain  the  rights  they  enjoyed  as  workers  there  in  accordance  with 
Article  7(3)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC. 
                                                            
8  
Regulation  (EU)  No  492/2011  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  5  April  2011  on 
freedom  of  movement  for  workers  within  the  Union  (OJ  L  141,  27.5.2011,  p.  1). 
19      
19     
Article  23 
Rights  of  self-­‐employed  persons 
1.   Subject  to  the  limitations  set  out  in  Articles  51  and  52  TFEU,  self-­‐employed  persons  in  the  host 
State  and  self-­‐employed  frontier  workers  in  the  State  or  States  of  work  shall  enjoy  the  rights 
guaranteed  by  Articles  49  and  55  TFEU.  These  rights  include: 
(a)   the  right  to  take  up  and  pursue  activities  as  self-­‐employed  persons  and  to  set  up  and 
manage  undertakings  under  the  conditions  laid  down  by  the  host  State  for  its  own 
nationals,  as  set  out  in  Article  49  TFEU; 
(b)  the  rights  as  set  out  in  points  (c)  to  (h)  of  Article  22(1)  of  this  Agreement. 
2.   Article  22(2)  shall  apply  to  direct  descendants  of  self-­‐employed  workers. 
3.  Article  22(3)  shall  apply  to  self-­‐employed  frontier  workers,  without  prejudice  to  Article  32 
concerning  the  scope  of  rights. 
Article  24 
Issuance  of  a  document  identifying  frontier  workers'  rights 
The  State  of  work  may  require  Union  citizens  and  United  Kingdom  nationals  who  have  rights  as 
frontier  workers  under  this  Title  to  apply  for  a  document  certifying  that  they  have  such  rights  under 
this  Title.  Such  Union  citizens  and  United  Kingdom  nationals  shall  have  the  right  to  be  issued  with 
such  a  document. 
CHAPTER  3 
Professional  qualifications 
Article  25 
Recognised  professional  qualifications 
1.   The  recognition,  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  of  professional  qualifications,  as  defined 
in  point  (b)  of  Article  3(1)  of  Directive  2005/36/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council 9 ,  of  Union  citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  and  their  family  members  by  their  host 
State  or  their  State  of  work  shall  maintain  its  effects  in  the  respective  State,  including  the  right  to 
pursue  the  profession  under  the  same  conditions  as  its  nationals,  where  such  recognition  was 
made  in  accordance  with  any  of  the  following  provisions: 
(a)   Title  III  of  Directive  2005/36/EC  in  respect  of  the  recognition  of  professional 
qualifications  in  the  context  of  the  exercise  of  the  freedom  of  establishment,  whether 
such  recognition  fell  under  the  general  system  for  the  recognition  of  evidence  of  training, 
the  system  for  the  recognition  of  professional  experience  or  the  system  for  the 
recognition  on  the  basis  of  coordination  of  minimum  training  conditions; 
                                                            
9  
Directive  2005/36/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  7  September  2005  on  the 
recognition  of  professional  qualifications  (OJ  L  255,  30.9.2005,  p.  22). 
20      
20     
(b)  Article  10(1)  and  (3)  of  Directive  98/5/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 10 
in  respect  of  gaining  admission  to  the  profession  of  lawyer  in  the  host  Member  State; 
(c)  Article  14  of  Directive  2006/43/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 11  in 
respect  of  the  approval  of  statutory  auditors  from  another  Member  State; 
(d)  Council  Directive  74/556/EEC 12  in  respect  of  the  acceptance  of  evidence  of  the 
knowledge  and  ability  necessary  in  order  to  take  up  or  pursue  activities  of  self-­‐employed 
persons  and  of  intermediaries  engaging  in  the  trade  and  distribution  of  toxic  products  or 
activities  involving  the  professional  use  of  toxic  products. 
2.   Recognitions  of  professional  qualifications  for  the  purposes  of  point  (a)  of  paragraph  1  of  this 
Article  shall  include: 
(a)   recognition  of  professional  qualifications  which  have  benefited  from  Article  3(3)  of  that 
Directive; 
(b)  decisions  granting  partial  access  to  a  professional  activity  in  accordance  with  Article  4f  of 
that  Directive; 
(c)  recognitions  of  professional  qualifications  for  establishment  purposes  made  under 
Article  4d  of  that  Directive. 
Article  26 
Ongoing  procedures  on  the  recognition  of  professional  qualifications 
Article  4,  Article  4d  in  respect  of  recognitions  of  professional  qualifications  for  establishment 
purposes,  Article  4f  and  Title  III  of  Directive  2005/36/EC,  Article  10(1),  (3)  and  (4)  of  Directive 
98/5/EC,  Article  14  of  Directive  2006/43/EC  and  Directive  74/556/EEC  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the 
examination  by  a  competent  authority  of  their  host  State  or  State  of  work  of  any  application  for  the 
recognition  of  professional  qualifications  introduced  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  Union 
citizens  or  United  Kingdom  nationals  and  in  respect  of  the  decision  on  any  such  application. 
Articles  4a,  4b  and  4e  of  Directive  2005/36/EC  shall  also  apply  in  so  far  as  relevant  for  the  completion 
of  the  procedures  for  the  recognitions  of  professional  qualifications  for  establishment  purposes 
under  Article  4d  of  Directive  2005/36/EC. 
                                                            
10  
Directive  98/5/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  16  February  1998  to  facilitate 
practice  of  the  profession  of  lawyer  on  a  permanent  basis  in  a  Member  State  other  than  that  in  which 
the  qualification  was  obtained  (OJ  L  77,  14.3.1998,  p.  36). 
11  
Directive  2006/43/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  17  May  2006  on  statutory 
audits  of  annual  accounts  and  consolidated  accounts,  amending  Council  Directives  78/660/EEC  and 
83/349/EEC  and  repealing  Council  Directive  84/253/EEC  (OJ  L  157,  9.6.2006,  p.  87).  
12  
Council  Directive  74/556/EEC  of  4  June  1974  laying  down  detailed  provisions  concerning  transitional 
measures  relating  to  activities,  trade  in  and  distribution  of  toxic  products  and  activities  entailing  the 
professional  use  of  such  products  including  activities  of  intermediaries  (OJ  L  307,  18.11.1974,  p.  5). 
21      
21     
Article  27 
Administrative  cooperation  on  recognition  of  professional  qualifications 
1.  With  regard  to  the  pending  applications  referred  to  in  Article  26,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the 
Member  States  shall  cooperate  in  order  to  facilitate  the  application  of  Article  26.  Cooperation 
may  include  the  exchange  of  information,  including  on  disciplinary  action  or  criminal  sanctions 
taken  or  any  other  serious  and  specific  circumstances  which  are  likely  to  have  consequences  for 
the  pursuit  of  the  activities  falling  under  the  Directives  referred  to  in  Article  26.  
2.  By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  7,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  entitled  to  use  the  internal 
market  information  system  in  respect  of  applications  referred  to  in  Article  26  in  so  far  as  they 
concern  procedures  for  the  recognition  of  professional  qualifications  for  establishment  purposes 
under  Article  4d  of  Directive  2005/36/EC.  Such  use  shall  not  exceed  9  months  from  the  end  of 
the  transition  period. 
  
22      
22     
Title  III 
Coordination  of  social  security  systems 
Article  28 
Persons  covered 
1.   This  Title  shall  apply  to  the  following  persons: 
(a)   Union  citizens  who  are  subject  to  the  legislation  of  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the 
transition  period,  as  well  as  their  family  members  and  survivors; 
(b)  United  Kingdom  nationals  who  are  subject  to  the  legislation  of  a  Member  State  at  the 
end  of  the  transition  period,  as  well  as  their  family  members  and  survivors; 
(c)  Union  citizens  who  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  are  subject  to  the  legislation  of  a 
Member  State  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  as  well  as  their  family  members  and 
survivors; 
(d)  United  Kingdom  nationals  who  reside  in  a  Member  State,  and  are  subject  to  the 
legislation  of  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  as  well  as  their 
family  members  and  survivors; 
(e)  persons  who  do  not  fall  within  points  (a)  to  (d)  but  are: 
(i)  Union  citizens  who  pursue  an  activity  as  employed  or  self-­‐employed  person  in 
the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  and  who,  based  on  Title 
II  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004,  are  subject  to  the  legislation  of  a  Member 
State;  or 
(ii)   United  Kingdom  nationals  who  pursue  an  activity  as  employed  or  self-­‐employed 
person  in  one  or  more  Member  States  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  and 
who,  based  on  Title  II  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004,  are  subject  to  the 
legislation  of  the  United  Kingdom;  
as  well  as  their  family  members  and  survivors; 
(f)   stateless  persons  and  refugees,  residing  in  a  Member  State  or  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
who  are  in  one  of  the  situations  described  under  points  (a)  to  (e),  as  well  as  their  family 
members  and  survivors;  
(g)   nationals  of  third  countries,  as  well  as  members  of  their  families  and  survivors,  who  are 
in  one  of  the  situations  described  under  points  (a)  to  (e),  provided  that  they  fulfil  the 
conditions  of  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  859/2003 13 . 
2.  These  persons  shall  be  covered  for  as  long  as  they  continue  without  interruption  to  be  in  one  of 
the  situations  set  out  in  paragraph  1  involving  both  a  Member  State  and  the  United  Kingdom  at 
the  same  time. 
                                                            
13  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  859/2003  of  14  May  2003  extending  the  provisions  of  Regulation  (EEC)  No 
1408/71  and  Regulation  (EEC)  No  574/72  to  nationals  of  third  countries  who  are  not  already  covered 
by  those  provisions  solely  on  the  ground  of  their  nationality  (OJ  L  124,  20.5.2003,  p.  1). 
23      
23     
Article  29 
Social  security  coordination  rules 
1.  The  rules  and  objectives  set  out  in  Article  48  TFEU,  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004  and  Regulation 
(EC)  No  987/2009,  shall  apply  to  the  persons  covered  by  this  Title.  
The  parties  shall  take  due  account  of  the  Decisions  and  Recommendations  of  the  Administrative 
Commission  for  the  Coordination  of  Social  Security  Systems  attached  to  the  European 
Commission,  set  up  under  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004  ("Administrative  Commission")  listed  in 
[Part  I  of  Annex  y+5  to]  this  Agreement. 
2.  By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  8  of  this  Agreement,  for  the  purposes  of  this  Title,  the 
definitions  in  Article  1  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004  shall  apply.  
3.   With  regard  to  the  persons  referred  to  in  Article  28(1)(g)  of  this  Agreement,  the  reference  to 
Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004  and  Regulation  (EC)  No  987/2009  in  this  Article  shall  be  understood 
as  reference  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  1408/71  and  Regulation  (EC)  No  574/72  respectively 
Article  29a 
Special  situations  covered 
1. The  following  situations,  insofar  as  they  relate  to  persons   not  covered  by  Article  28,  shall  be 
covered  by  this  Title  only  to  the  extent  set  out  below: 
(a)   the  following  persons  shall  be  covered  by  this  Title  for  the  purposes  of  reliance  on  and 
aggregation  of  periods  of  insurance,  employment,  self-­‐employment  or  residence, 
including  rights  and  obligations  deriving  from  such  periods  in  accordance  with  Regulation 
(EC)  No  883/2004: 
(i)  Union  citizens,  as  well  as  stateless  persons  and  refugees  residing  in  a  Member 
State  and  nationals  of  third  countries  who  fulfil  the  conditions  of  Regulation  (EC) 
No  859/2003,  who  have  been  subject  to  the  legislation  of  the  United  Kingdom 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  but  are  no  longer  subject  to  that 
legislation; 
(ii)   United  Kingdom  nationals,  as  well  as  stateless  persons  and  refugees  residing  in 
the  United  Kingdom  and  nationals  of  third  countries  who  fulfil  the  conditions  of 
Regulation  (EC)  No  859/2003,  who  have  been  subject  to  the  legislation  of  a 
Member  State  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  but  are  no  longer  subject 
to  that  legislation;  
For  the  purposes  of  aggregation  of  periods,  both  periods  completed  before  and  after  the 
end  of  the  transition  period  shall  be  taken  into  account  in  accordance  with  Regulation 
(EC)  No  883/2004; 
(b)  the  rules  set  out  in  Articles  20  and  27  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004  shall  continue  to 
apply  to  a  person  who  has  begun  a  course  of  planned  health  care  treatment  before  the 
end  of  the  transition  period  in  a  Member  State  or  in  the  United  Kingdom,  while  that 
State  was  not  the  competent  State  until  the  end  of  the  treatment.  The  corresponding 
reimbursement  procedures  shall  also  apply  even  after  the  treatment  ends.  They  enjoy 
the  right  to  enter  and  exit  the  State  of  treatment  in  accordance  with  Article  13,  mutatis 
mutandis; 
24      
24     
(c)  the  rules  set  out  in  Articles  19  and  27  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004  shall  continue  to 
apply  to  a  person,  covered  by  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004,  who  is  staying  at  the  end  of 
the  transition  period  in  a  Member  State  or  the  United  Kingdom,  until  the  end  of  the  stay. 
The  corresponding  reimbursement  procedures  shall  also  apply  even  after  the  treatment 
ends; 
(d)  the  rules  set  out  in  Articles  67  to  69  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004  shall  continue  to 
apply  to  awards  of  family  benefit  to  which  there  is  entitlement  at  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  to  the  following  persons:  
(i)  Union  citizens,  stateless  persons  and  refugees  residing  in  a  Member  State  as  well 
as  nationals  of  third  countries  who  fulfil  the  conditions  of  Regulation  (EC)  No 
859/2003,  residing  in  a  Member  State,  who  are  subject  to  the  legislation  of  a 
Member  State  and  have  family  members  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the 
end  of  the  transition  period;  
(ii)   United  Kingdom  nationals,  as  well  as  stateless  persons  and  refugees  residing  in 
the  United  Kingdom  and  nationals  of  third  countries  who  fulfil  the  conditions  of 
Regulation  (EC)  No  859/2003,  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom,  who  are  subject  to 
the  legislation  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  have  family  members  residing  in  a 
Member  State  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period.  
(e)  in  the  situations  set  out  in  Article  29a(1)(d)(i)  or  (ii),  for  any  persons  who  have  rights  as 
family  members  pursuant  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004,  such  as  derived  rights  for 
sickness  benefits  in  kind,  the  Regulation  and  the  corresponding  provisions  in  Regulation 
(EC)  No  987/2009  shall  continue  to  apply  for  as  long  as  the  conditions  provided  therein 
are  fulfilled. 
2. If,  following  the  grant  of  a  pension  or  a  benefit  based  on  periods  of  insurance,  employment,  self-­‐
employment  or  residence  in  accordance  with  point  (a)  of  paragraph  1  of  this  Article, 
(a)   the  United  Kingdom  is  competent  for  the  sickness  benefits  of  a  person  residing  in  a 
Member  State,  or 
(b)    a  Member  State  is  competent  for  the  sickness  benefits  of  a  person  residing  in  the  United 
Kingdom, 
that  person,  as  well  as  his  or  her  family  members  and  survivors,  shall  be  entitled  to  sickness 
benefits  as  set  out  in  Articles  22  to  30,  33  and  34  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004  (in  the  case  of  a 
pensioner  or  a  pension  claimant),  or  Articles  17  to  21,  33  and  34  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004 
(in  the  case  of  a  person  receiving  a  benefit  other  than  pension).  The  corresponding 
reimbursement  procedures  shall  apply. 
This  provision  shall  apply  mutatis  mutandis  as  regards  family  benefits  based  on  Articles  67  to  69 
of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004. 
Article  30 
Administrative  cooperation 
1.  By  way  of  derogation  from  Articles  6  and  123(1),  and  as  of  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this 
Agreement,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  have  the  status  of  observer  in  the  Administrative 
Commission.  It  may,  where  the  items  on  the  agenda  concern  the  United  Kingdom,  send  a 
representative,  to  be  present  in  an  advisory  capacity,  to  the  meetings  of  the  Administrative 
25      
25     
Commission  and  to  the  meetings  of  the  Technical  Commission  for  data  processing  and  of  the 
Audit  Board,  both  attached  to  the  Administrative  Commission  where  such  items  are  discussed. 
2.   By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  7,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  take  part  in  the  Electronic 
Exchange  of  Social  Security  Information  (EESSI)  and  bear  the  related  costs. 
Article  31 
Development  of  law  and  adaptations  of  Union  acts 
1.  Where  Regulations  (EC)  No  883/2004  and  (EC)  No  987/2009  are  referred  to  in  this  Agreement 
and  where  those  Regulations  are  amended  or  replaced  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  the 
reference  to  those  Regulations  shall  be  read  as  referring  to  them  as  amended  or  replaced,  in 
accordance  with  the  acts  listed  in  [Part  II  of  Annex  y+5]  to  this  Agreement. 
The  Joint  Committee  shall  revise  [Part  II  of  Annex  y+5]  to  this  Agreement  and  align  it  to  any  act 
amending  or  replacing  Regulations  (EC)  No  883/2004  and  (EC)  No  987/2009  as  soon  as  such  an 
act  is  adopted  by  the  Union.  To  that  end,  the  Union  shall,  as  soon  as  possible  after  adoption, 
inform  the  United  Kingdom  within  the  Joint  Committee  of  any  act  amending  or  replacing  those 
Regulations. 
2.   By  way  of  derogation  from  the  second  subparagraph  of  paragraph  1,  where  an  act  amending  or 
replacing  Regulations  (EC)  No  883/2004  and  (EC)  No  987/2009: 
(a) amends  or  replaces  the  matters  covered  by  Article  3  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004;  or 
(b) makes  a  cash  benefit  which  is  exportable  or  non-­‐exportable  under  that  Regulation  at  the 
end  of  the  transition  period  non-­‐exportable  or  exportable  respectively;  or 
(c) makes  a  cash  benefit  which  is  exportable  for  a  limited  period  of  time  under  that 
Regulation  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  exportable  for  an  unlimited  period  of  time, 
or  makes  a  cash  benefit  which  is  exportable  for  an  unlimited  period  of  time  under  that 
Regulation  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  exportable  only  for  a  limited  period  of 
time; 
the  Joint  Committee  shall  assess  the  effects  of  the  act.  In  making  its  assessment  the  Joint 
Committee  shall  consider  in  good  faith  the  scale  of  the  changes  referred  to  in  (a)  to  (c),  as  well  as 
the  importance  of  the  continued  good  functioning  of  Regulations  (EC)  No  883/2004  and  (EC)  No 
987/2009  between  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  and  of  there  being  a  competent  State  in 
relation  to  an  individual  in  scope  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004. 
If  the  Joint  Committee  so  decides  within  6  months  from  the  information  given  by  the  Union 
pursuant  to  paragraph  1,  [Part  II  of  Annex  y+5]  to  this  Agreement  shall  not  be  aligned  to  the  act 
referred  to  in  subparagraph  1.  
For  the  purposes  of  this  paragraph: 
(a)   ‘exportable’  means  payable  under  Regulation  (EC)  No  883/2004  to  or  in  relation  to  a 
person  residing  in  a  Member  States  other  than  that  in  which  the  institution  responsible 
for  providing  the  benefit  is  situated.  ‘Non-­‐exportable’  shall  be  interpreted  accordingly; 
and 
(b)  ‘exportable  for  an  unlimited  period  of  time’  means  exportable  for  as  long  as  the 
conditions  giving  rise  to  entitlements  are  met. 
26      
26     
3.  Regulations  (EC)  No  883/2004  and  (EC)  No  987/2009  shall,  for  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement, 
be  understood  as  comprising  the  adaptations  listed  in  [Part  III  of  Annex  y+5]  to  this  Agreement. 
The  United  Kingdom  shall,  as  soon  as  possible  after  adoption,  inform  the  Union  of  any  changes  in 
domestic  provisions  of  relevance  to  [Part  III  of  Annex  y+5]  to  this  Agreement  within  the  Joint 
Committee. 
4.  The  Decisions  and  Recommendations  of  the  Administrative  Commission  shall,  for  the  purposes  of 
this  Agreement,  be  understood  as  comprising  the  list  set  out  in  [Part  I  of  Annex  y+5].  The  Joint 
Committee  shall  amend  [Part  I  of  Annex  y+5]  to  reflect  any  new  Decision  or  Recommendation 
adopted  by  the  Administrative  Commission.  To  that  end,  the  Union  shall,  as  soon  as  possible 
after  adoption,  inform  the  United  Kingdom  thereof  within  the  Joint  Committee.  Such  adaptations 
shall  be  made  by  the  Joint  Committee  on  a  proposal  of  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom.   
27      
27     
TITLE  IV 
OTHER  PROVISIONS 
Article  33 
Publicity 
The  Member  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  shall  disseminate  information  concerning  the  rights  and 
obligations  of  persons  covered  by  this  Part,  in  particular  by  means  of  awareness-­‐raising  campaigns 
conducted,  as  appropriate,  through  national  and  local  media  and  other  means  of  communication. 
Article  34 
More  favourable  provisions 
1.  This  Part  shall  not  affect  any  laws,  regulations  or  administrative  provisions  applicable  in  a  host 
State  or  a  State  of  work  which  would  be  more  favourable  to  the  persons  concerned.  This 
paragraph  shall  not  apply  to  Title  III. 
2.   Article  11  and  Article  21(1)  shall  be  without  prejudice  to  the  Common  Travel  Area  arrangements 
between  the  United  Kingdom  and  Ireland  as  regards  more  favourable  treatment  which  may 
result  from  these  arrangements  for  the  persons  concerned. 
Article  35 
Life-­‐long  protection 
The  persons  covered  by  this  Part  shall  enjoy  the  rights  provided  for  in  relevant  Titles  of  Part  Two  for 
their  lifetime,  unless  they  cease  to  meet  the  conditions  set  out  in  those  Titles. 
  
28      
28     
PART  THREE 
SEPARATION  PROVISIONS 
TITLE  I 
GOODS  PLACED  ON  THE  MARKET 
Article  36 
Definitions 
For  the  purposes  of  this  Title,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply: 
(a)   "making  available  on  the  market"  means  any  supply  of  a  good  for  distribution,  consumption 
or  use  on  the  market  in  the  course  of  a  commercial  activity,  whether  in  return  for  payment 
or  free  of  charge;  
(b)  "placing  on  the  market"  means  the  first  making  available  of  a  good  on  the  Union  market  or 
the  United  Kingdom's  market;  
(c)  "supply  of  a  good  for  distribution,  consumption  or  use"  means  that  an  existing  and 
individually  identifiable  good,  after  the  stage  of  manufacturing  has  taken  place,  is  the  subject 
matter  of  an  agreement,  written  or  verbal,  between  two  or  more  legal  or  natural  persons  for 
the  transfer  of  ownership,  any  other  property  right,  or  possession  concerning  the  good  in 
question,  or  is  the  subject  matter  of  an  offer  to  a  legal  or  natural  person  or  persons  to 
conclude  such  an  agreement; 
(d)  "putting  into  service"  means  the  first  use  of  a  good  within  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom 
by  the  end  user  for  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  intended  or,  in  the  case  of  marine 
equipment,  placing  on  board;  
(e)  "market  surveillance"  means  the  activities  carried  out  and  measures  taken  by  market 
surveillance  authorities  to  ensure  that  goods  comply  with  the  applicable  requirements  and 
do  not  endanger  health,  safety  or  any  other  aspect  of  public  interest  protection;  
(f)   "market  surveillance  authority"  means  an  authority  of  a  Member  State  or  of  the  United 
Kingdom  responsible  for  carrying  out  market  surveillance  on  its  territory;  
(g)   "conditions  for  the  marketing  of  goods"  means  requirements  concerning  the  characteristics 
of  goods  such  as  levels  of  quality,  performance,  safety  or  dimensions,  including  composition, 
terminology,  symbols,  testing  and  testing  methods,  packaging,  marking  or  labelling  and 
conformity  assessment  procedures;  the  term  also  covers  requirements  concerning 
production  methods  and  processes,  where  these  have  an  effect  on  product  characteristics;  
(h)  "conformity  assessment  body"  means  a  body  that  performs  conformity  assessment  activities 
including  calibration,  testing,  certification  and  inspection; 
(i)  "notified  body"  means  a  conformity  assessment  body  authorised  to  carry  out  third-­‐party 
conformity  assessment  tasks  under  Union  law  harmonising  the  conditions  for  the  marketing 
of  goods; 
29      
29     
(j)    "animal  products"  means  products  of  animal  origin,  animal  by-­‐products  and  derived  products 
as  referred  to  in  Article  4(29),  (30)  and  (31),  respectively,  of  Regulation  (EU)  2016/429 14 ,  feed 
of  animal  origin,  and  food  and  feed  containing  products  of  animal  origin. 
Article  37 
Continued  circulation  of  goods  placed  on  the  market 
1.  Any  good  that  was  lawfully  placed  on  the  Union  market  or  the  United  Kingdom's  market  before 
the  end  of  the  transition  period  may: 
(a)   be  further  made  available  on  the  market  of  the  Union  or  of  the  United  Kingdom  and 
circulate  between  these  two  markets  until  it  reaches  its  end-­‐user; 
(b)  where  provided  in  the  applicable  provisions  of  Union  law,  be  put  into  service  in  the 
Union  or  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
2.  The  requirements  set  out  in  Articles  34  and  35  TFEU  and  the  relevant  Union  law  governing  the 
marketing  of  goods,  including  the  conditions  for  the  marketing  of  goods,  applicable  to  the  goods 
concerned  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the  goods  referred  to  in  paragraph  1. 
3.   Paragraph  1  shall  apply  to  all  existing  and  individually  identifiable  goods  within  the  meaning  of 
Title  II  of  Part  Three  of  the  TFEU,  with  the  exception  of  the  circulation  between  the  Union  market 
and  the  United  Kingdom's  market  or  vice-­‐versa  of: 
(a)   live  animals  and  germinal  products; 
(b)    animal  products.  
4.  In  respect  of  a  movement  of  live  animals  or  of  germinal  products  between  a  Member  State  and 
the  United  Kingdom,  or  vice-­‐versa,  the  provisions  of  Union  law  listed  in  [Annex  y]  shall  apply, 
provided  that  the  date  of  departure  was  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
5.  This  Article  shall  be  without  prejudice  to  the  possibility  for  the  United  Kingdom,  a  Member  State 
or  the  Union  to  take  measures  to  prohibit  or  restrict  the  making  available  on  its  market  of  a  good 
referred  to  in  paragraph  1,  or  a  category  of  such  goods,  where  and  to  the  extent  permitted  by 
Union  law.  
6.  The  provisions  of  this  Title  shall  be  without  prejudice  to  any  applicable  rules  on  modalities  of 
sale,  intellectual  property,  customs  procedures,  tariffs  and  taxes.  
Article  38 
Proof  of  placing  on  the  market 
Where  an  economic  operator  relies  on  Article  37(1)  with  respect  to  a  specific  good,  that  operator 
shall  bear  the  burden  of  proof  of  demonstrating,  on  the  basis  of  any  relevant  document,  that  the 
good  was  placed  on  the  Union  market  or  the  United  Kingdom's  market  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period. 
                                                            
14  
Regulation  (EU)  2016/429  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  9  March  2016  on 
transmissible  animal  diseases  and  amending  and  repealing  certain  acts  in  the  area  of  animal  health 
('Animal  Health  Law')  (OJ  L  84,  31.3.2016,  p.  1) 
30      
30     
Article  39 
Market  surveillance 
1.  The  market  surveillance  authorities  of  Member  States  and  of  the  United  Kingdom  shall  exchange 
promptly  any  relevant  information  collected  with  regard  to  the  goods  referred  to  in  Article  37(1) 
in  the  context  of  their  respective  market  surveillance  activities.  They  shall  in  particular 
communicate  to  each  other  and  to  the  European  Commission  any  information  relating  to  those 
goods  presenting  a  serious  risk  as  well  as  any  measures  taken  in  relation  to  non-­‐compliant  goods, 
including  relevant  information  drawn  from  networks,  information  systems  and  databases 
established  under  Union  or  United  Kingdom  law  in  relation  to  those  goods. 
2.  Member  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  shall  transmit  without  delay  any  request  from  the 
market  surveillance  authorities  of  the  United  Kingdom  or  of  Member  States,  respectively,  to  a 
conformity  assessment  body  established  in  their  territory  that  concerns  a  conformity  assessment 
carried  out  by  that  body  in  its  capacity  as  notified  body  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
Member  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  shall  ensure  that  any  such  request  is  promptly 
addressed  by  the  conformity  assessment  body.  
Article  40 
Transfer  of  files  and  documents  relating  to  ongoing  procedures 
The  United  Kingdom  shall  transfer  without  delay  to  the  competent  authority  of  a  Member  State 
designated  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  provided  for  in  the  applicable  Union  law  all  relevant 
files  or  documents  in  relation  to  assessments,  approvals  and  authorisations  ongoing  on  the  day 
before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  and  led  by  a  United  Kingdom  competent 
authority  in  accordance  with  Regulation  (EU)  No  528/2012 15 ,  Regulation  (EC)  No  1107/2009 16 , 
Directive  2001/83/EC 17  and  Directive  2001/82/EC 18  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council. 
Article  41 
Making  available  of  information  in  relation  to  past  authorisation  procedures  for  medicinal  products  
1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall,  upon  a  reasoned  request  from  a  Member  State  or  the  European 
Medicines  Agency,  make  available  without  delay  the  marketing  authorisation  dossier  of  a 
medicinal  product  authorised  by  a  competent  authority  of  the  United  Kingdom  before  the  end  of 
the  transition  period,  where  this  is  necessary  for  the  assessment  of  a  marketing  authorisation 
application  in  accordance  with  Articles  10  and  10a  of  Directive  2001/83/EC  or  Articles  13  and  13a 
of  Directive  2001/82/EC.  
                                                            
15  
Regulation  (EU)  No  528/2012  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  22  May  2012 
concerning  the  making  available  on  the  market  and  use  of  biocidal  products  (OJ  L  167,  27.6.2012,  p.  1). 
16  
Regulation  (EC)  No  1107/2009  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  21  October  2009 
concerning  the  placing  of  plant  protection  products  on  the  market  (OJ  L  309,  24.11.2009,  p.  1). 
17  
Directive  2001/83/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  6  November  2001  on  the 
Community  code  relating  to  medicinal  products  for  human  use  (OJ  L  311,  28.11.2001,  p.  67). 
18  
Directive  2001/82/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  6  November  2001  on  the 
Community  code  relating  to  veterinary  medicinal  products  (OJ  L  311,  28.11.2001,  p.  1). 
31      
31     
2.  A  Member  State  shall,  upon  a  reasoned  request  from  the  United  Kingdom,  make  available 
without  delay  the  marketing  authorisation  dossier  of  a  medicinal  product  authorised  by  a 
competent  authority  of  that  Member  State  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  where  this  is 
necessary  for  the  assessment  of  a  marketing  authorisation  application  in  the  United  Kingdom  in 
accordance  with  the  United  Kingdom's  legislative  requirements,  to  the  extent  that  they  replicate 
the  circumstances  of  Articles  10  and  10a  of  Directive  2001/83/EC  or  Articles  13  and  13a  of 
Directive  2001/82/EC. 
Article  42 
Making  available  of  information  held  by  notified  bodies  established  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in  a 
Member  State 
1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  ensure  that,  upon  request  by  the  certificate  holder,  information  held 
by  a  conformity  assessment  body  established  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  relation  to  its  activities  as 
a  notified  body  under  Union  law  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  is  made  available  to  a 
notified  body  established  in  a  Member  State  indicated  by  the  certificate  holder  without  delay. 
2.  Member  States  shall  ensure  that,  upon  request  by  the  certificate  holder,  information  held  by  a 
notified  body  established  in  the  Member  State  concerned  in  relation  to  its  activities  before  the 
end  of  the  transition  period  is  made  available  to  a  conformity  assessment  body  established  in  the 
United  Kingdom  indicated  by  the  certificate  holder  without  delay. 
  
32      
32     
TITLE  II 
ONGOING  CUSTOMS  PROCEDURES 
Article  43 
Union  status  of  goods 
1. Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 19  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  Union  goods  referred  to  in  Article  5(23)  of  that  Regulation  moving  from  the  customs 
territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  customs  territory  of  the  Union,  or  vice  versa,  provided 
that  the  movement  started  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  ended  thereafter.  A 
movement  of  goods  which  has  started  before  and  ends  on  or  after  the  date  of  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  shall  be  treated  as  an  intra  EU  movement  regarding  importation  and 
exportation  licencing  requirements  in  Union  law. 
2. For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  1,  the  presumption  of  the  customs  status  of  Union  goods  as 
referred  to  in  Article  153(1)  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  shall  not  apply.  The  customs  status 
of  those  goods  as  Union  goods,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  the  movement  referred  to  in  paragraph  1 
started  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  shall  need  to  be  proven  for  every  movement  by 
the  person  concerned  by  any  of  the  means  referred  to  in  Article  199  of  Commission 
Implementing  Regulation  (EU)  2015/2447 20 .  The  proof  of  the  start  of  the  movement  shall  be 
provided  by  means  of  a  transport  document  relating  to  the  goods. 
3. Paragraph  2  shall  not  apply  in  respect  of  Union  goods  that  are  carried  by  air  and  have  been 
loaded  or  transhipped  at  an  airport  in  the  customs  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  for 
consignment  to  the  customs  territory  of  the  Union  or  at  an  airport  in  the  customs  territory  of  the 
Union  for  consignment  to  the  customs  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  are  carried  under 
cover  of  a  single  transport  document  issued  in  either  of  the  customs  territories  concerned, 
provided  that  the  movement  by  air  started  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  the 
movement  ended  thereafter.  
4. Paragraph  2  shall  not  apply  in  respect  of  Union  goods  that  are  carried  by  sea  and  have  been 
shipped  between  ports  in  the  customs  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  ports  in  the  customs 
territory  of  the  Union  by  a  regular  shipping  service,  as  referred  to  in  Article  120  of  Commission 
Delegated  Regulation  (EU)  2015/2446 21 ,  provided  that: 
(a)   the  voyage  comprising  the  ports  in  the  customs  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  and 
ports  in  the  customs  territory  of  the  Union  started  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  and  ended  thereafter;  and  
(b)  the  regular  shipping  service  vessel  called  at  one  or  several  ports  in  the  customs  territory 
of  the  United  Kingdom  or  in  the  customs  territory  of  the  Union  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period. 
                                                            
19  
Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  9  October  2013  laying 
down  the  Union  Customs  Code  (OJ  L  269,  10.10.2013,  p.  1).  
20  
Commission  Implementing  Regulation  (EU)  2015/2447  of  24  November  2015  laying  down  detailed 
rules  for  implementing  certain  provisions  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  of  the  European  Parliament 
and  of  the  Council  laying  down  the  Union  Customs  Code  (OJ  L  343,  29.12.2015,  p.  558). 
21  
Commission  Delegated  Regulation  (EU)  2015/2446  of  28  July  2015  supplementing  Regulation 
Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  as  regards  detailed  rules 
concerning  certain  provisions  of  the  Union  Customs  Code  (OJ  L  343,  29.12.2015,  p.  1). 
33      
33     
5. When  during  the  voyage  referred  to  in  point  (a)  of  paragraph  4  the  regular  shipping  service 
vessel  calls  at  one  or  several  ports  in  the  customs  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  after  the  end 
of  the  transition  period: 
(a)   for  goods  loaded  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  unloaded  in  those  ports,  the 
customs  status  of  Union  goods  shall  not  be  altered;  
(b)  for  goods  loaded  in  ports  called  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  the  customs  status 
of  Union  goods  shall  not  be  altered  provided  that  it  is  proven  in  accordance  with 
paragraph  2. 
Article  44 
Entry  summary  declaration  and  pre-­‐departure  declaration 
1.  Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  shall  apply  in  respect  of  entry  summary  declarations  that  were 
lodged  at  a  customs  office  of  first  entry  in  accordance  with  Chapter  I  of  Title  IV  of  that  Regulation 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  and  those  declarations  shall  produce  the  same  legal 
effects  in  the  customs  territory  of  the  Union  and  the  customs  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom 
after  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
2.  Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  shall  apply  in  respect  of  pre-­‐departure  declarations  that  were 
lodged  in  accordance  with  Chapter  I  of  Title  VIII  of  that  Regulation  and,  where  applicable,  the 
goods  were  released  in  accordance  with  Article  194  of  that  Regulation  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period.  Those  declarations  shall  produce  the  same  legal  effects  in  the  customs  territory 
of  the  Union  and  the  customs  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  after  the  end  of  the  transition 
period. 
Article  45 
Ending  of  temporary  storage  or  customs  procedures 
1.  Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  shall  apply  in  respect  of  non-­‐Union  goods  that  were  in  temporary 
storage  referred  to  in  Article  5(17)  of  that  Regulation  and  in  respect  of  goods  that  were  under 
any  of  the  customs  procedures  referred  to  in  Article  5(16)  of  that  Regulation  in  the  customs 
territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  until  temporary  storage  is 
ended,  one  of  the  special  customs  procedures  is  discharged,  the  goods  are  released  for  free 
circulation,  or  are  removed  from  the  territory  thereafter,  but  not  later  than  [dd/mm/yyyy]. * 
2.  Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013,  Council  Decision  2014/335/EU,  Euratom 22 ,  Council  Regulation  (EU, 
Euratom)  No  608/2014 23  and  Council  Regulation  No  (EU,  Euratom)  609/2014 24  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  any  customs  debt  arising  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  from  the  end  or 
discharge  referred  to  in  paragraph  1. 
                                                            
*  
Time  limits  yet  to  be  specified. 
22  
Council  Decision  2014/335/EU,  Euratom  of  26  May  2014  on  the  system  of  own  resources  of  the 
European  Union  (OJ  L  168,  7.6.2014,  p.  105). 
23  
Council  Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  608/2014  of  26  May  2014  laying  down  implementing  measures 
for  the  system  of  own  resources  of  the  European  Union  (OJ  L  168,  7.6.2014,  p.  29). 
24  
Council  Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  609/2014  of  26  May  2014  on  the  methods  and  procedure  for 
making  available  the  traditional,  VAT  and  GNI-­‐based  own  resources  and  on  the  measures  to  meet  cash 
requirements  (OJ  L  168,  7.6.2014,  p.  39). 
34      
34     
3.  Section  1  of  Chapter  1  of  Title  II  of  Implementing  Regulation  (EU)  2015/2447  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  requests  to  benefit  from  tariffs  quotas  which  have  been  accepted  by  the  customs 
authorities  in  the  customs  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  where  the  required  supporting 
documents  have  been  provided  in  accordance  with  Article  50  of  that  Regulation  by  the  customs 
authorities  in  the  customs  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period,  and  in  respect  of  the  cancellation  of  requests  and  returns  of  unused  allocated  quantities 
of  such  requests. 
Article  46 
Access  to  relevant  network  and  information  systems  and  data  bases 
By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  7,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  have  access,  to  the  extent  strictly 
necessary  to  comply  with  its  obligations  set  out  in  this  Title,  to  the  network  and  information  systems 
and  the  databases  listed  in  [Annex  y+4]. * 
  
                                                            
*  
Agreement  on  this  Article  is  conditional  on  agreement  on  the  content  of  Annex  y+4. 
35      
35     
TITLE  III 
ONGOING  VALUE  ADDED  TAX  AND  EXCISE  DUTY  MATTERS 
Article  47 
Value  added  tax  (VAT) 
1.  Council  Directive  2006/112/EC 25  shall  apply  in  respect  of  goods  dispatched  or  transported  from 
the  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  territory  of  a  Member  State,  or  vice  versa,  provided 
that  the  dispatch  or  transport  started  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  ended 
thereafter. 
2.  The  taxable  person's  rights  and  obligations  under  Council  Directive  2006/112/EEC,  with  regard  to 
transactions  that  took  place  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  with  regard  to 
transactions  covered  by  paragraph  1,  are  maintained  until  5  years  after  the  end  of  the  transition 
period. 
Article  48 
Excise  goods 
Council  Directive  2008/118/EC 26  shall  apply  in  respect  of  movements  of  excise  goods  under  a  duty 
suspension  arrangement  and  movements  of  excise  goods  after  release  for  consumption  from  the 
territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  territory  of  a  Member  State,  or  vice  versa,  provided  that  the 
movement  started  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  ended  thereafter. 
Article  49 
Access  to  relevant  network  and  information  systems  and  data  bases 
By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  7,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  have  access,  to  the  extent  strictly 
necessary  to  comply  with  its  obligations  set  out  in  this  Title,  to  the  network  and  information  systems 
and  the  databases  listed  in  [Annex  y+4]. * 
  
                                                            
25  
Council  Directive  2006/112/EC  of  28  November  2006  on  the  common  system  of  value  added  tax  (OJ  L 
347,  11.12.2006,  p.  1). 
26  
Council  Directive  2008/118/EC  of  16  December  2008  concerning  the  general  arrangements  for  excise 
duty  and  repealing  Directive  92/12/EEC  (OJ  L  9,  14.01.2009,  p.  12). 
*  
Agreement  on  this  Article  is  conditional  on  agreement  on  the  content  of  Annex  y+4. 
36      
36     
TITLE  IV 
INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY  
Article  50 
Continued  protection  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  registered  or  granted  rights 
1.   The  holder  of  any  of  the  following  intellectual  property  rights  which  have  been  registered  or 
granted  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  shall,  without  any  re-­‐examination,  become  the 
holder  of  a  comparable  registered  and  enforceable  intellectual  property  right  in  the  United 
Kingdom,  as  provided  for  by  the  law  of  the  United  Kingdom: 
(a)   the  holder  of  a  European  Union  trade  mark  registered  in  accordance  with  Regulation 
(EU)  2017/1001  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 27  shall  become  the  holder 
of  a  trade  mark  in  the  United  Kingdom,  consisting  of  the  same  sign,  for  the  same  goods 
or  services; 
(b)    the  holder  of  a  Community  design  registered  and  where  applicable  published  following 
deferral  of  publication  in  accordance  with  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  6/2002 28  shall 
become  the  holder  of  a  registered  design  right  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  same 
design; 
(c)  the  holder  of  a  Community  plant  variety  right  granted  pursuant  to  Council  Regulation 
(EC)  No  2100/94 29  shall  become  the  holder  of  a  plant  variety  right  in  the  United  Kingdom 
for  the  same  plant  variety. 
2.   Where  a  geographical  indication,  designation  of  origin  or  traditional  speciality  guaranteed  within 
the  meaning  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  1151/2012  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 30 ,  a 
geographical  indication,  designation  of  origin  or  traditional  term  for  wine  within  the  meaning  of 
Regulation  (EU)  No  1308/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 31 ,  a  geographical 
indication  within  the  meaning  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  110/2008  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of 
the  Council 32  or  within  the  meaning  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  251/2014  of  the  European  Parliament 
and  of  the  Council 33 ,  is  protected  in  the  Union  on  the  last  day  of  the  transition  period,  those 
entitled  to  use  the  geographical  indication,  the  designation  of  origin,  the  traditional  speciality 
guaranteed  or  the  traditional  term  concerned  shall,  as  from  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and 
                                                            
27  
Regulation  (EU)  2017/1001  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  14  June  2017  on  the 
European  Union  trade  mark  (OJ  L  OJ  L  154,  16.6.2017,  p.  1). 
28  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  6/2002  of  12  December  2001  on  Community  designs  (OJ  L  3,  5.1.2002, 
p.  1). 
29  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  2100/94  of  27  July  1994  on  Community  plant  variety  rights  (OJ  L  227, 
1.9.1994,  p.  1). 
30  
Regulation  (EU)  No  1151/2012  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  21  November  2012 
on  quality  schemes  for  agricultural  products  and  foodstuffs  (OJ  L  343,  14.12.2012,  p.  1). 
31  
Regulation  (EU)  No  1308/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  17  December  2013 
establishing  a  common  organisation  of  the  markets  in  agricultural  products  and  repealing  Council 
Regulations  (EEC)  No  922/72,  (EEC)  No  234/79,  (EC)  No  1037/2001  and  (EC)  No  1234/2007  (OJ  L  347, 
20.12.2013,  p.  671). 
32  
Regulation  (EC)  No  110/2008  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  15  January  2008  on  the 
definition,  description,  presentation,  labelling  and  the  protection  of  geographical  indications  of  spirit 
drinks  and  repealing  Council  Regulation  (EEC)  No  1576/89  (OJ  L  39,  13.2.2008,  p.  16). 
33  
Regulation  (EU)  No  251/2014  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  26  February  2014  on 
the  definition,  description,  presentation,  labelling  and  the  protection  of  geographical  indications  of 
aromatised  wine  products  and  repealing  Council  Regulation  (EEC)  No  1601/91  (OJ  L  84,  20.3.2014, 
p.  14).  
37      
37     
without  any  re-­‐examination,  be  entitled  to  use  a  right  in  the  United  Kingdom  granted  under  the 
law  of  the  United  Kingdom  which  provides  for  at  least  the  same  level  of  protection,  with  respect 
to  the  geographical  indication,  the  designation  of  origin,  the  traditional  speciality  guaranteed  or 
the  traditional  term  concerned,  as  the  protection  provided  for  by  the  following  provisions  of 
Union  law:  
(a)   Article  4(1)(i),  (j)  and  (k)  of  Directive  (EU)  2015/2436  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of 
the  Council 34 ;  and 
(b)  in  view  of  the  right  concerned,  Articles  13,  14(1),  24,  36(3),  38,  44  and  45(1)(b)  of 
Regulation  (EU)  No  1151/2012;  Article  90(1)  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  1306/2008  of  the 
European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 35 ;  Articles  100(3),  102(1),  103,  113  and 
157(1)(c)(x)  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  1308/2013;  Article  62(3)  and  (4)  of  Commission 
Regulation  (EC)  No  607/2009 36 ;  Articles  16,  23(1)  and,  in  so  far  as  related  to  compliance 
with  Articles  16  and  23(1),  Article  24(1)  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  110/2008;  or  Articles  19(1) 
and  20  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  251/2014. 
3.   Notwithstanding  paragraphs  1  and  2,  if  an  intellectual  property  right  referred  to  in  those 
paragraphs  is  declared  invalid  or  revoked,  or  in  the  case  of  a  Community  plant  variety  right  is 
declared  null  and  void  or  cancelled,  in  the  Union  as  the  result  of  an  administrative  or  judicial 
procedure  which  was  ongoing  on  the  last  day  of  the  transition  period,  the  corresponding  right  in 
the  United  Kingdom  shall  also  be  declared  invalid  or  revoked,  or  declared  null  and  void,  or 
cancelled.  The  date  of  effect  of  the  declaration  or  revocation  or  cancellation  in  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  be  the  same  as  in  the  Union. 
By  way  of  derogation  from  the  first  subparagraph,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  not  be  obliged  to 
declare  invalid  or  revoke  the  corresponding  right  in  the  United  Kingdom  where  the  grounds  for 
invalidity  or  revocation  of  the  European  Union  trademark  or  Registered  Community  design  do 
not  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
4.   A  trade  mark  or  registered  design  right  which  arises  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with 
points  (a)  and  (b)  of  paragraph  1  shall  have  as  its  first  renewal  date  the  renewal  date  of  the 
corresponding  intellectual  property  right  registered  in  accordance  with  Union  law.  
5.   In  respect  of  trade  marks  in  the  United  Kingdom  referred  to  in  point  (a)  of  paragraph  1  of  this 
Article,  the  following  shall  apply: 
(a)   the  trade  mark  shall  enjoy  the  date  of  filing  or  the  date  of  priority  of  the  European  Union 
trade  mark  and,  where  appropriate,  the  seniority  of  a  trade  mark  of  the  United  Kingdom 
claimed  under  Article  39  or  40  of  Regulation  (EU)  2017/1001; 
(b)  the  trade  mark  shall  not  be  liable  to  revocation  on  the  ground  that  the  corresponding 
European  Union  trade  mark  had  not  been  put  into  genuine  use  in  the  territory  of  the 
United  Kingdom  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
                                                            
34  
Directive  (EU)  2015/2436  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  16  December  2015  to 
approximate  the  laws  of  the  Member  States  relating  to  trade  marks  (OJ  L  336,  23.12.2015,  p.  1).
35  
Regulation  (EU)  No  1306/2008  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  17  December  2013  on 
the  financing,  management  and  monitoring  of  the  common  agricultural  policy  (OJ  L  347,  20.12.2013,  p. 
549).  
36  
Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No  607/2009  of  14  July  2009  laying  down  certain  detailed  rules  for  the 
implementation  of  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  479/2008  as  regards  protected  designations  of  origin 
and  geographical  indications,  traditional  terms,  labelling  and  presentation  of  certain  wine  sector 
products  (OJ  L  193  24.7.2009,  p.  60).  
38      
38     
(c)  the  owner  of  a  European  Union  trade  mark  having  acquired  a  reputation  in  the  Union 
shall  be  entitled  to  exercise  in  the  United  Kingdom  rights  equivalent  to  those  provided 
for  in  point  (c)  of  Article  9(2)  of  Regulation  (EU)  2017/1001  and  point  (a)  of  Article  5(3)  of 
Directive  2015/2436  in  respect  of  the  corresponding  trade  mark  on  the  basis  of  the 
reputation  acquired  in  the  Union  at  the  date  of  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and 
thereafter  the  continuing  reputation  of  that  trade  mark  shall  be  based  on  the  use  of  the 
mark  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
6.   In  respect  of  registered  design  rights  and  plant  variety  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom  referred  to  in 
points  (b)  and  (c)  of  paragraph  1,  the  following  shall  apply:  
(a)   the  term  of  protection  under  the  law  of  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  at  least  equal  to  the 
remaining  period  of  protection  under  Union  law  of  the  corresponding  registered 
Community  design  or  Community  plant  variety  right; 
(b)  the  date  of  filing  or  the  date  of  priority  shall  be  that  of  the  corresponding  registered 
Community  design  or  Community  plant  variety  right. 
Article  51 
Registration  procedure 
1.   The  registration  or  grant  of  the  intellectual  property  rights  pursuant  to  Article  50(1)  and  (2)  of 
this  Agreement  shall  be  carried  out  free  of  charge  by  the  relevant  entities  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
using  the  data  available  in  the  registries  of  the  European  Union  Intellectual  Property  Office,  the 
Community  Plant  Variety  Office  and  the  European  Commission.  Annex  III  to  Regulation  (EC)  No 
110/2008  shall  be  considered  a  registry  for  the  purpose  of  this  Article. 
2.   For  the  purpose  of  the  registration  process,  holders  of  the  intellectual  property  rights  referred  to 
in  Article  50(1)  and  those  entitled  to  use  the  rights  referred  to  in  Article  50(2)  shall  not  be 
required  to  introduce  an  application  or  to  undertake  any  particular  administrative  procedure. 
They  shall  not  be  required  to  have  a  correspondence  address  in  the  United  Kingdom,  without 
prejudice  to  such  address  being  required  at  the  moment  of  the  first  renewal  of  the  intellectual 
property  right  concerned,  where  applicable.  
3.   The  European  Union  Intellectual  Property  Office,  the  Community  Plant  Variety  Office  and  the 
European  Commission  shall  provide  to  the  relevant  entities  in  the  United  Kingdom  the 
information  necessary  for  the  registration  or  grant  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  the  intellectual 
property  rights  referred  to  in  Article  50(1)  or  (2). 
4.   This  Article  shall  be  without  prejudice  to  renewal  fees  that  may  apply  at  the  time  of  renewal  of 
the  rights,  or  the  possibility  for  the  holders  concerned  to  surrender  their  intellectual  property 
rights  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  procedure  under  the  law  of  the 
United  Kingdom. 
Article  52 
Continued  protection  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  international  registrations  designating  the  Union 
The  United  Kingdom  shall  take  measures  to  ensure  that  natural  or  legal  persons  who  have  obtained 
protection  for  international  registrations  of  trade  marks  or  designs  designating  the  Union  pursuant  to 
the  Madrid  system  for  the  international  registration  of  marks  or  the  Hague  system  for  the 
international  deposit  of  industrial  designs  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  enjoy  protection  in 
39      
39     
the  United  Kingdom  for  their  trade  marks  or  industrial  designs  in  respect  of  those  international 
registrations. 
Article  53 
Continued  protection  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  unregistered  Community  designs 
The  holder  of  a  right  in  relation  to  an  unregistered  Community  design  which  arose  before  the  end  of 
the  transition  period  in  accordance  with  Regulation  (EC)  No  6/2002  shall  in  relation  to  that 
unregistered  Community  design  ipso  iure  become  the  holder  of  an  enforceable  intellectual  property 
right  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  provided  for  by  the  law  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  affording  the 
same  level  of  protection  as  that  provided  for  in  Regulation  (EC)  No  6/2002.  The  term  of  protection  of 
that  right  under  the  law  of  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  at  least  equal  to  the  remaining  period  of 
protection  referred  to  in  Article  11(1)  of  that  Regulation  of  the  corresponding  unregistered 
Community  design.  
Article  54 
Continued  protection  of  databases 
1.  The  holder  of  a  right  in  relation  to  a  database  in  respect  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance 
with  Article  7  of  Directive  96/9/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 37  which  arose 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  shall  in  relation  to  that  database  maintain  an  enforceable 
intellectual  property  right  in  respect  of  the  United  Kingdom  as  provided  for  by  the  law  of  the 
United  Kingdom  and  affording  the  same  level  of  protection  as  that  provided  for  in  Directive 
96/9/EC,  provided  that  the  holder  of  that  right  continues  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of 
Article  11  of  that  Directive.  The  term  of  protection  of  that  right  under  the  law  of  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  be  at  least  equal  to  the  remaining  period  of  protection  referred  to  in  Article  10  of 
Directive  96/9/EC. 
2.  The  following  persons  and  undertakings  shall  be  deemed  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of 
Article  11  of  Directive  96/9/EC: 
(a)   United  Kingdom  nationals; 
(b)  persons  with  a  habitual  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom; 
(c)  undertakings  established  in  the  United  Kingdom;  where  such  an  undertaking  has  only  its 
registered  office  in  the  United  Kingdom,  its  operations  must  be  genuinely  linked  on  an 
ongoing  basis  with  the  economy  of  the  United  Kingdom  or  of  a  Member  State. 
Article  55 
Right  of  priority  with  respect  to  pending  applications  for  European  Union  trade  marks  and  Community 
plant  variety  rights 
1.   Where  a  person  filed  an  application  for  a  European  Union  trade  mark  or  a  Community  design  in 
accordance  with  Union  law  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  where  that  application 
                                                            
37
Directive  96/9/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  11  March  1996  on  the  legal 
protection  of  databases  (OJ  L  77,  27.3.1996,  p.  20).
40      
40     
was  accorded  a  date  of  filing,  that  person  shall  have,  for  the  same  trade  mark  in  respect  of  goods 
or  services  which  are  identical  with  or  contained  within  those  for  which  the  application  has  been 
filed  in  the  Union  or  the  same  design,  a  right  to  file  an  application  in  the  United  Kingdom  during  a 
period  of  9  months  from  the  end  of  the  transition  period.   An  application  made  pursuant  to  this 
Article  shall  have  the  same  filing  date  and  date  of  priority  as  the  corresponding  application  filed 
in  the  Union  and  where  appropriate  the  seniority  of  a  trade  mark  of  the  United  Kingdom  claimed 
under  Article  39  or  40  of  Regulation  EU  2017/1001. 
2.   Where  a  person  filed  an  application  for  a  Community  plant  variety  right  in  accordance  with  Union 
law  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  that  person  shall  have,  for  the  purpose  of  filing  an 
application  for  the  same  plant  variety  right  in  the  United  Kingdom,  an  ad  hoc  right  of  priority  in 
the  United  Kingdom  during  a  period  of  six  months  from  the  end  of  the  transition  period.  The 
right  of  priority  shall  have  the  effect  that  the  date  of  priority  of  the  application  for  the 
Community  plant  variety  right  counts  as  the  date  of  application  for  a  plant  variety  right  in  the 
United  Kingdom  for  the  purpose  of  determining  distinctness,  novelty  and  entitlement  to  the 
right.  
Article  56 
Pending  applications  for  supplementary  protection  certificates  in  the  United  Kingdom 
1.   Regulation  (EC)  No  1610/96  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 38  and  Regulation  (EC) 
No  469/2009  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 39  shall  apply  in  respect  of 
applications  for  supplementary  protection  certificates  for  plant  protection  products,  for 
medicinal  products,  or  applications  for  the  extension  of  the  duration  of  such  certificates, 
submitted  to  an  authority  in  the  United  Kingdom  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  where 
the  administrative  procedure  for  the  grant  of  the  certificate  concerned  or  of  the  extension  of  its 
duration  was  ongoing  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
2.   Any  certificate  granted  pursuant  to  paragraph  1  shall  provide  for  the  same  level  of  protection  as 
that  provided  for  in  Regulation  (EC)  No  1610/96  or  Regulation  (EC)  No  469/2009. 
Article  57 
Exhaustion  of  rights 
Rights  conferred  by  an  intellectual  property  right  which  were  exhausted  both  in  the  Union  and  in  the 
United  Kingdom  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  under  the  conditions  provided  for  by  Union 
law  shall  remain  exhausted  both  in  the  Union  and  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
  
                                                            
38  
Regulation  (EC)  No  1610/96  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  23  July  1996  concerning 
the  creation  of  a  supplementary  protection  certificate  for  plant  protection  products  (OJ  L  198, 
8.8.1996,  p.  30). 
39  
Regulation  (EC)  No  469/2009  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  6  May  2009  concerning 
the  supplementary  protection  certificate  for  medicinal  products  (OJ  L  152,  16.6.2009,  p.  1). 
41      
41     
TITLE  V 
ONGOING  POLICE  AND  JUDICIAL  COOPERATION  IN  CRIMINAL  MATTERS  
Article  58 
Ongoing  judicial  cooperation  proceedings  in  criminal  matters 
1.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  in  the  Member  States  in  situations  involving  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  following  acts  shall  apply  as  follows: 
(a) the  Convention,  established  by  the  Council  in  accordance  with  Article  34  of  the  Treaty  on 
European  Union  on  Mutual  Assistance  in  Criminal  Matters  between  the  Member  States 
of  the  European  Union  and  the  Protocol  established  by  the  Council  in  accordance  with 
Article  34  of  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  to  the  Convention  on  Mutual  Assistance  in 
Criminal  Matters  between  the  Member  States  of  the  European  Union  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  mutual  legal  assistance  requests  received  under  the  respective  instrument 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  central  authority  or  judicial  authority; 
(b) Council  Framework  Decision  2002/584/JHA 40  shall  apply  in  respect  of  European  arrest 
warrants  where  the  requested  person  was  arrested  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  for  the  purposes  of  the  execution  of  a  European  arrest  warrant,  irrespective  of 
the  decision  of  the  executing  judicial  authority  as  to  whether  the  requested  person 
remains  in  detention  or  is  provisionally  released; 
(c) Council  Framework  Decision  2003/577/JHA 41  shall  apply  in  respect  of  freezing  orders 
received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  central  authority,  by  the 
competent  judicial  authority  for  execution  or  by  a  judicial  authority  in  the  executing 
State  with  no  jurisdiction  to  recognise  or  execute  a  freezing  order  which  transmits  it  ex 
officio  to  the  competent  judicial  authority  for  execution; 
(d) Council  Framework  Decision  2005/214/JHA 42  shall  apply  in  respect  of  decisions  received 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  central  authority  or  the  competent 
authority  in  the  executing  State  or  by  an  authority  of  the  executing  State  with  no 
jurisdiction  to  recognise  or  execute  a  decision  which  transmits  it  ex  officio  to  the 
competent  authority  for  execution;  
(e) Council  Framework  Decision  2006/783/JHA 43  shall  apply  in  respect  of  confiscation  orders 
received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  central  authority  or  the 
competent  authority  of  the  executing  State  or  by  an  authority  in  the  executing  State  with 
no  jurisdiction  to  recognise  or  execute  a  confiscation  order  which  transmits  it  ex  officio 
to  the  competent  authority  for  execution; 
(f) Council  Framework  Decision  2008/909/JHA 44  shall  apply  in  respect  of  judgments  received 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  competent  authority  of  the  executing 
                                                            
40  
Council  Framework  Decision  2002/584/JHA  of  13  June  2002  on  the  European  arrest  warrant  and  the 
surrender  procedures  between  Member  States  (OJ  L  190,  18.7.2002,  p.  1). 
41  
Council  Framework  Decision  2003/577/JHA  of  22  July  2003  on  the  execution  in  the  European  Union  of 
orders  freezing  property  or  evidence  (OJ  L  196,  2.8.2003,  p.  45). 
42  
Council  Framework  Decision  2005/214/JHA  of  24  February  2005  on  the  application  of  the  principle  of 
mutual  recognition  to  financial  penalties  (OJ  L  76,  22.3.2005,  p.  16). 
43  
Council  Framework  Decision  2006/783/JHA  of  7  October  2006  on  the  application  of  the  principle  of 
mutual  recognition  to  confiscation  orders  (OJ  L  328,  24.11.2006,  p.  54). 
44  
Council  Framework  Decision  2008/909/JHA  of  27  November  2008  on  the  application  of  the  principle  of 
mutual  recognition  to  judgments  in  criminal  matters  imposing  custodial  sentences  or  measures 
42      
42     
State  or  by  an  authority  of  the  executing  State  with  no  competence  to  recognise  and 
enforce  a  judgment  which  transmits  it  ex  officio  to  the  competent  authority  for 
execution; 
(g) Council  Framework  Decision  2008/675/JHA 45  shall  apply  in  respect  of  new  criminal 
proceedings  within  the  meaning  of  Article  3  of  that  Framework  Decision  initiated  before 
the  end  of  the  transition  period;  
(h) Council  Framework  Decision  2009/315/JHA 46  shall  apply  in  respect  of  requests  for 
information  on  conviction  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  central 
authority;  however,  replies  to  such  requests  cannot  be  transmitted  after  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  through  the  European  Criminal  Records  Information  System  established 
pursuant  to  the  Council  Decision  2009/316/JHA 47 ; 
(i) Council  Framework  Decision  2009/829/JHA 48  shall  apply  in  respect  of  decisions  on 
supervision  measures  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  central 
authority  or  the  competent  authority  in  the  executing  State  or  by  an  authority  of  the 
executing  State  with  no  competence  to  recognise  a  decision  which  forwards  it  ex  officio 
to  the  competent  authority  for  execution; 
(j) Directive  2011/99/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 49  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  European  protection  orders  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period 
by  the  central  authority  or  the  competent  authority  of  the  executing  State  or  by  an 
authority  of  the  executing  State  with  no  competence  to  recognise  a  European  protection 
order  which  forwards  it  ex  officio  to  the  competent  authority  for  execution; 
(k) Directive  2014/41/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 50  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  European  Investigation  Orders  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  by  the  central  authority  or  the  executing  authority  or  by  an  authority  in  the 
executing  State  with  no  competence  to  recognise  or  execute  a  European  Investigation 
Order  which  forwards  it  ex  officio  to  the  executing  authority  for  execution. 
2.  The  competent  authorities  of  the  United  Kingdom  may  continue  to  participate  in  the  joint 
investigation  teams  set  up  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in  accordance  with  Article  13 
of  the  Convention  established  by  the  Council  in  accordance  with  Article  34  of  the  Treaty  on 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
involving  deprivation  of  liberty  for  the  purpose  of  their  enforcement  in  the  European  Union  (OJ  L  327, 
5.12.2008,  p.  27). 
45  
Council  Framework  Decision  2008/675/JHA  of  24  July  2008  on  taking  account  of  convictions  in  the 
Member  States  of  the  European  Union  in  the  course  of  new  criminal  proceedings  (OJ  L  220,  15.8.2008, 
p.  32). 
46  
Council  Framework  Decision  2009/315/JHA  of  26  February  2009  on  the  organisation  and  content  of 
the  exchange  of  information  extracted  from  the  criminal  record  between  Member  States  (OJ  L  93, 
7.4.2009,  p.  23). 
47  
Council  Decision  2009/316/JHA  of  6  April  2009  on  the  establishment  of  the  European  Criminal  Records 
Information  System  (ECRIS)  in  application  of  Article  11  of  Framework  Decision  2009/315/JHA  (OJ  L  93, 
7.4.2009,  p.  33). 
48  
Council  Framework  Decision  2009/829/JHA  of  23  October  2009  on  the  application,  between  Member 
States  of  the  European  Union,  of  the  principle  of  mutual  recognition  to  decisions  on  supervision 
measures  as  an  alternative  to  provisional  detention  (OJ  L  294,  11.11.2009,  p.  20). 
49  
Directive  2011/99/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  13  December  2011  on  the 
European  protection  order  (OJ  L  338,  21.12.2011,  p.  2). 
50  
Directive  2014/41/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  3  April  2014  regarding  the 
European  Investigation  Order  in  criminal  matters  (OJ  L  130,  1.5.2014,  p.  1). 
43      
43     
European  Union,  on  Mutual  Assistance  in  Criminal  Matters  between  the  Member  States  of  the 
European  Union 51  or  in  accordance  with  Council  Framework  Decision  2002/465/JHA 52  in  which  it 
was  participating  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
Article  59 
Ongoing  law  enforcement  cooperation  proceedings,  police  cooperation  and  exchange  of  information 
In  the  United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  in  the  Member  States  in  situations  involving  the  United  Kingdom, 
the  following  acts  shall  apply  as  follows: 
(a)   Articles  39  and  40  of  the  Convention  implementing  the  Schengen  Agreement  of  14  June  1985 
("Schengen  Implementing  Convention") 53 ,  in  conjunction  with  Articles  42  and  43  of  the 
Schengen  Implementing  Convention,  shall  apply  in  respect  of: 
(i)  requests  in  accordance  with  Article  39  of  the  Schengen  Implementing  Convention 
received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  central  body  responsible  in 
the  Contracting  Party  for  international  police  cooperation  or  by  competent 
authorities  of  the  requested  Party  or  by  requested  police  authorities  with  no  power 
to  deal  with  a  request  which  forward  it  to  the  competent  authorities; 
(ii)   requests  for  assistance  of  cross-­‐border  surveillance  in  accordance  with  Article  40(1) 
of  the  Schengen  Implementing  Convention  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  by  an  authority  designated  by  a  Contracting  Party; 
(iii)  cross-­‐border  surveillance  in  accordance  with  Article  40(2)  of  the  Schengen 
Implementing  Convention  carried  out  without  prior  authorisation  that  started  before 
the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
(b)  the  Convention  drawn  up  on  the  basis  of  Article  K.3  of  the  Treaty  on  European  Union,  on 
mutual  assistance  and  cooperation  between  customs  administrations 54  shall  apply  in  respect 
of: 
(i)  requests  for  information  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the 
requested  authority; 
(ii)   requests  for  surveillance  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the 
requested  authority; 
(iii)  requests  for  enquiries  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the 
requested  authority; 
(iv)  requests  for  notification  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the 
requested  authority; 
                                                            
51  
OJ  C  197,  12.7.2000,  p.  3. 
52  
Council  Framework  Decision  2002/465/JHA  of  13  June  2002  on  joint  investigation  teams  (OJ  L  162, 
20.6.2002,  p.  1). 
53  
Convention  implementing  the  Schengen  Agreement  of  14  June  1985  between  the  Governments  of  the 
States  of  the  Benelux  Economic  Union,  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  and  the  French  Republic  on 
the  gradual  abolition  of  checks  at  their  common  borders  (OJ  L  239,  22.9.2000,  p.  19). 
54  
OJ  C  24,  23.1.1998,  p.  2. 
44      
44     
(v)   requests  for  authorisation  of  the  cross-­‐border  surveillance  or  for  entrusting 
observation  to  the  officers  of  the  Member  State  in  whose  territory  observation  is 
carried  out  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  an  authority 
designated  by  requested  Member  State  empowered  to  grant  the  requested 
authorisation  or  to  pass  on  the  request; 
(vi)  cross-­‐border  surveillance  carried  out  without  prior  authorisation  that  started  before 
the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
(vii)   requests  to  carry  out  controlled  delivery  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  by  the  requested  authority; 
(viii)  requests  to  authorise  covert  investigations  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  by  the  requested  authority; 
(ix)   joint  special  investigation  teams  set  up  pursuant  to  Article  24  of  that  Convention 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
(c)  Council  Decision  2000/642/JHA 55  shall  apply  in  respect  of  requests  received  before  the  end  of 
the  transition  period  by  the  requested  Financial  Intelligence  Unit;  
(d)  Council  Framework  Decision  2006/960/JHA 56  shall  apply  in  respect  of  requests  received 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  requested  competent  law  enforcement 
authority; 
(e)  Council  Decision  2007/533/JHA 57  shall  apply  in  respect  of  exchange  of  supplementary 
information  where  there  was  a  hit  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  on  an  alert  issued 
in  the  Schengen  Information  System;  
(f)   Council  Decision  2007/845/JHA 58  shall  apply  in  respect  of  requests  received  before  the  end  of 
the  transition  period  by  an  Asset  Recovery  Office; 
(g)   Directive  (EU)  2016/681  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 59  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  requests  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  the  passenger 
information  unit  in  accordance  with  Articles  9  and  10  of  that  Directive. 
                                                            
55  
Council  Decision  2000/642/JHA  of  17  October  2000  concerning  arrangements  for  cooperation 
between  financial  intelligence  units  of  the  Member  States  in  respect  of  exchanging  information  (OJ  L 
271,  24.10.2000,  p.  4). 
56  
Council  Framework  Decision  2006/960/JHA  of  18  December  2006  on  simplifying  the  exchange  of 
information  and  intelligence  between  law  enforcement  authorities  of  the  Member  States  of  the 
European  Union  (OJ  L  386,  29.12.2006,  p.  89). 
57  
Council  Decision  2007/533/JHA  of  12  June  2007  on  the  establishment,  operation  and  use  of  the 
second  generation  Schengen  Information  System  (SIS  II)  (OJ  L  205,  7.8.2007,  p.  63). 
58  
Council  Decision  2007/845/JHA  of  6  December  2007  concerning  cooperation  between  Asset  Recovery 
Offices  of  the  Member  States  in  the  field  of  tracing  and  identification  of  proceeds  from,  or  other 
property  related  to,  crime  (OJ  L  332,  18.12.2007,  p.  103). 
59  
Directive  (EU)  2016/681  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  27  April  2016  on  the  use  of 
passenger  name  record  (PNR)  data  for  the  prevention,  detection,  investigation  and  prosecution  of 
terrorist  offences  and  serious  crime  (OJ  L  119,  4.5.2016,  p.  132). 
45      
45     
Article  60 
Confirmation  of  receipt  or  arrest 
1.  The  competent  issuing  or  requesting  authority  may  request  an  acknowledgement  of  receipt  of  a 
judicial  decision  or  a  request  referred  to  in  points  (a),  (c)  to  (f)  and  (h)  to  (k)  of  Article  58(1)  and 
points  (a)(i)  and  (ii),  points  (b)(i)  to  (v)  and  (vii),  (viii)  and  (ix),  and  points  (c),  (d),  (f)  and  (g)  of 
Article  59  within  10  days  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  where  it  has  doubts  as  to  whether 
such  a  judicial  decision  or  request  was  received  by  the  executing  or  requested  authority  before 
the  end  of  the  transition  period.  
2.  In  the  cases  referred  to  in  point  (b)  of  Article  58(1),  where  the  competent  issuing  judicial 
authority  has  doubts  as  to  whether  the  requested  person  was  arrested  pursuant  to  Article  11  of 
Framework  Decision  2002/584/JHA  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  it  may  request  from 
the  competent  executing  judicial  authority  a  confirmation  of  the  arrest  within  10  days  after  the 
end  of  the  transition  period. 
3.  The  executing  or  requested  authority  referred  to  in  paragraphs  1  and  2  shall  reply  to  a  request 
for  confirmation  of  receipt  or  arrest  within  10  days  following  the  request. 
Article  61 
Other  applicable  Union  acts 
Directive  2010/64/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 60  and  Directive  2012/13/EU  of 
the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 61  shall  apply  in  respect  of  proceedings  referred  to  in 
point  (b)  of  Article  58(1)  of  this  Agreement.  
                                                            
60  
Directive  2010/64/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  20  October  2010  on  the  right 
to  interpretation  and  translation  in  criminal  proceedings  (OJ  L  280,  26.10.2010,  p.  1). 
61  
Directive  2012/13/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  22  May  2012  on  the  right  to 
information  in  criminal  proceedings  (OJ  L  142,  1.6.2012,  p.  1). 
46      
46     
TITLE  VI 
ONGOING  JUDICIAL  COOPERATION  IN  CIVIL  AND  COMMERCIAL  MATTERS 
Article  62 
Applicable  law  in  contractual  and  non-­‐contractual  matters 
In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  following  acts  shall  apply  as  follows: 
(a)   Regulation  (EC)  No  593/2008  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 62  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  contracts  concluded  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period;  
(b)    Regulation  (EC)  No  864/2007  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 63  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  events  giving  rise  to  damage,  and  which  occurred  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period.  
Article  63 
Jurisdiction,  recognition  and  enforcement  of  judicial  decisions,  and  related  cooperation  between 
central  authorities 
1.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  in  the  Member  States  in  situations  involving  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  following  acts  or  provisions  shall  apply  in  respect  of  legal  proceedings  instituted 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period: 
(a)   the  provisions  regarding  jurisdiction  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  1215/2012  of  the  European 
Parliament  and  of  the  Council 64 ;  
(b)    the  provisions  regarding  jurisdiction  of  Regulation  (EU)  2017/1001 65 ,  of  Regulation  (EC) 
No  6/2002 66 ,  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  2100/94 67 ,  of  Regulation  (EU)  2016/679  of  the 
European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 68  and  of  Directive  96/71/EC  of  the  European 
Parliament  and  of  the  Council 69 ; 
                                                            
62  
Regulation  (EC)  No  593/2008  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  17  June  2008  on  the 
law  applicable  to  contractual  obligations  (Rome  I)  (OJ  L  177,  4.7.2008,  p.  6). 
63  
Regulation  (EC)  No  864/2007  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  11  July  2007  on  the  law 
applicable  to  non-­‐contractual  obligations  (Rome  II)  (OJ  L  199,  31.7.2007,  p.  40). 
64  
Regulation  (EU)  No  1215/2012  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  12  December  2012  on 
jurisdiction  and  the  recognition  and  enforcement  of  judgments  in  civil  and  commercial  matters  (OJ  L 
351,  20.12.2012,  p.  1). 
65  
Regulation  (EU)  2017/1001  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  14  June  2017  on  the 
European  Union  trade  mark  (codification)  (OJ  L  154,  16.6.2017,  p.1) 
66  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  6/2002  of  12  December  2001  on  Community  designs  (OJ  L  3,  5.1.2002,  p. 
1). 
67  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  2100/94  of  27  July  1994  on  Community  plant  variety  rights  (OJ  L  227, 
1.9.1994,  p.  1). 
68  
Regulation  (EU)  2016/679  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  27  April  2016  on  the 
protection  of  natural  persons  with  regard  to  the  processing  of  personal  data  and  on  the  free 
movement  of  such  data,  and  repealing  Directive  95/46/EC  (General  Data  Protection  Regulation)  (OJ  L 
119,  4.5.2016,  p.  1).  
69  
Directive  96/71/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  16  December  1996  concerning 
the  posting  of  workers  in  the  framework  of  the  provision  of  services  (OJ  L  18,  21.1.1997,  p.  1). 
47      
47     
(c)    the  provisions  of  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  2201/2003 70  regarding  jurisdiction;  
(d)  the  provisions  of  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  4/2009 71  regarding  jurisdiction. 
2.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  in  the  Member  States  in  situations  involving  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  following  provisions  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the  assessment  of  the  legal  force  of 
agreements  of  jurisdiction  or  choice  of  court  agreements  concluded  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period:  
(a)   Article  25  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  1215/2012; 
(b)  Article  4  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  4/2009. 
3.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  in  the  Member  States  in  situations  involving  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  following  acts  or  provisions  shall  apply  as  follows  in  respect  of  the  recognition 
and/or  enforcement  of  judgments,  decisions,  authentic  instruments,  court  settlements  and 
agreements: 
(a)   Regulation  (EU)  No  1215/2012  shall  apply  to  the  recognition  and  enforcement  of 
judgments  given  in  legal  proceedings  instituted  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period, 
and  to  authentic  instruments  formally  drawn  up  or  registered  and  court  settlements 
approved  or  concluded  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period;  
(b)  the  provisions  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  2201/2003  regarding  recognition  and  enforcement 
shall  apply  to  judgments  given  in  legal  proceedings  instituted  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period,  and  to  documents  formally  drawn  up  or  registered  as  authentic 
instruments,  and  agreements  concluded  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period;  
(c)  the  provisions  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  4/2009  regarding  recognition  and  enforcement  shall 
apply  to  decisions  given  in  legal  proceedings  instituted  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period,  and  to  court  settlements  approved  or  concluded,  and  authentic  instruments 
established  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
(d)    Regulation  (EC)  No  805/2004  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 72  shall  apply 
to  judgments  given  in  legal  proceedings  instituted  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period,  and  to  court  settlements  approved  or  concluded  and  authentic  instruments 
drawn  up  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  provided  that  the  certification  as  a 
European  Enforcement  Order  was  applied  for  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
4.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  in  the  Member  States  in  situations  involving  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  following  provisions  shall  apply  as  follows:  
(a)   Chapter  IV  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  2201/2003  shall  apply  to  requests  and  applications 
received  by  the  central  authority  or  other  competent  authority  of  the  requested  State 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period;  
                                                            
70  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  2201/2003  of  27  November  2003  concerning  jurisdiction  and  the 
recognition  and  enforcement  of  judgments  in  matrimonial  matters  and  the  matters  of  parental 
responsibility,  repealing  Regulation  (EC)  No  1347/2000  (OJ  L  338,  23.12.2003,  p.  1). 
71  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  4/2009  of  18  December  2008  on  jurisdiction,  applicable  law,  recognition 
and  enforcement  of  decisions  and  cooperation  in  matters  relating  to  maintenance  obligations  (OJ  L  7, 
10.1.2009,  p.  1). 
72  
Regulation  (EC)  No  805/2004  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  21  April  2004  creating 
a  European  Enforcement  Order  for  uncontested  claims  (OJ  L  143,  30.4.2004,  p.  15). 
48      
48     
(b)  Chapter  VII  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  4/2009  shall  apply  to  applications  for  recognition  or 
enforcement  as  referred  to  in  point  (c)  of  paragraph  3  of  this  Article  and  requests 
received  by  the  central  authority  of  the  requested  Member  State  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period; 
(c)    Regulation  (EU)  2015/848  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 73  shall  apply  to 
insolvency  proceedings  provided  that  the  main  proceedings  were  opened  before  the  end 
of  the  transition  period; 
(d)    Regulation  (EC)  No  1896/2006  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 74  shall 
apply  to  European  payment  orders  applied  for  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
where,  following  such  an  application,  the  proceedings  are  transferred  according  to 
Article  17(1)  of  that  Regulation,  the  proceedings  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  instituted 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
(e)    Regulation  (EC)  No  861/2007  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 75  shall  apply 
to  small  claims  procedures  for  which  the  application  was  lodged  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period; 
(f)    Regulation  (EU)  No  606/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 76  shall  apply 
to  certificates  issued  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
Article  64 
Ongoing  judicial  cooperation  procedures 
In  the  United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  in  the  Member  States  in  situations  involving  the  United  Kingdom ,
the  following  acts  shall  apply  as  follows :
(a) Regulation  (EC)  No  1393/2007  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 77  shall  apply  to 
judicial  and  extrajudicial  documents  which  were  received  for  the  purposes  of  service  before 
the  end  of  the  transition  period  by  one  of  the  following: 
(i)  a  receiving  agency;  
(ii)   a  central  body  of  the  State  where  the  service  is  to  be  effected;  or 
(iii)  diplomatic  or  consular  agents,  postal  services  or  judicial  officers,  officials  or  other 
competent  persons  of  the  State  addressed,  as  referred  to  in  Articles  13,  14  and  15  of 
that  Regulation; 
                                                            
73  
Regulation  (EU)  2015/848  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  20  May  2015  on 
insolvency  proceedings  (OJ  L  141,  5.6.2015,  p.  19). 
74  
Regulation  (EC)  No  1896/2006  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  12  December  2006 
creating  a  European  order  for  payment  procedure  (OJ  L  399,  30.12.2006,  p.  1). 
75  
Regulation  (EC)  No  861/2007  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  11  July  2007 
establishing  a  European  Small  Claims  Procedure  (OJ  L  199,  31.7.2007,  p.  1). 
76  
Regulation  (EU)  No  606/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  12  June  2013  on 
mutual  recognition  of  protection  measures  in  civil  matters  (OJ  L  181,  29.6.2013,  p.  4). 
77  
Regulation  (EC)  No  1393/2007  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  13  November  2007  on 
the  service  in  the  Member  States  of  judicial  and  extrajudicial  documents  in  civil  or  commercial  matters 
(service  of  documents),  and  repealing  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  1348/2000  (OJ  L  324,  10.12.2007,  p. 
79). 
49      
49     
(b)    Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  1206/2001 78  shall  apply  to  requests  received  before  the  end  of 
the  transition  period  by  one  of  the  following: 
(i)  a  requested  court; 
(ii)   a  central  body  of  the  State  where  the  taking  of  evidence  is  requested;  or 
(iii)  a  central  body  or  competent  authority  referred  to  in  Article  17(1)  of  that  Regulation; 
(c)  Council  Decision  2001/470/EC 79  shall  apply  to  requests  that  were  received  before  the  end  of 
the  transition  period;  the  requesting  contact  point  may  request  an  acknowledgement  of 
receipt,  within  seven  days  of  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  where  it  has  doubts  as  to 
whether  the  request  was  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
Article  65 
Other  applicable  provisions 
1.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  in  the  Member  States  in  situations  involving  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  following  acts  shall  apply  as  follows: 
(a)   Council  Directive  2003/8/EC 80  shall  apply  to  applications  for  legal  aid  that  were  received 
by  the  receiving  authority  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period.  The  requesting 
authority  may  request  an  acknowledgement  of  receipt,  within  seven  days  of  the  end  of 
the  transition  period,  where  it  has  doubts  as  to  whether  the  request  was  received  before 
that  date;  
(b)    Directive  2008/52/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 81  shall  apply  where, 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period:  
(i)  the  parties  agreed  to  use  mediation  after  the  dispute  had  arisen; 
(ii)   mediation  was  ordered  by  the  court;  or 
(iii)  a  court  invited  the  parties  to  use  mediation; 
(c)    Council  Directive  2004/80/EC 82  shall  apply  to  applications  received  by  the  deciding 
authority  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period.  
2.   Point  (a)  of  paragraph  1,  point  (a)  of  paragraph  2  and  point  (a)  of  paragraph  3  of  Article  63  of  this 
Agreement  shall  also  apply  in  respect  of  the  provisions  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  1215/2012  as 
applicable  by  virtue  of  the  agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the  Kingdom  of 
                                                            
78  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  1206/2001  of  28  May  2001  on  cooperation  between  the  courts  of  the 
Member  States  in  the  taking  of  evidence  in  civil  or  commercial  matters  (OJ  L  174,  27.6.2001,  p.  1). 
79  
Council  Decision  2001/470/EC  of  28  May  2001  establishing  a  European  Judicial  Network  in  civil  and 
commercial  matters  (OJ  L  174,  27.6.2001,  p.  25). 
80  
Council  Directive  2003/8/EC  of  27  January  2003  to  improve  access  to  justice  in  cross-­‐border  disputes 
by  establishing  minimum  common  rules  relating  to  legal  aid  for  such  disputes  (OJ  L  26,  31.1.2003,  p. 
41). 
81  
Directive  2008/52/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  21  May  2008  on  certain 
aspects  of  mediation  in  civil  and  commercial  matters  (OJ  L  136,  24.5.2008,  p.  3). 
82  
Council  Directive  2004/80/EC  of  29  April  2004  relating  to  compensation  to  crime  victims  (OJ  L  261, 
6.8.2004,  p.  15). 
50      
50     
Denmark  on  jurisdiction  and  the  recognition  and  enforcement  of  judgments  in  civil  and 
commercial  matters 83 .  
3.  Point  (a)  of  Article  64  of  this  Agreement  shall  also  apply  with  regard  to  the  provisions  of 
Regulation  (EC)  No  1393/2007  as  applicable  by  virtue  of  the  agreement  between  the  European 
Community  and  the  Kingdom  of  Denmark  on  the  service  of  judicial  and  extrajudicial  documents 
in  civil  and  commercial  matters 84 . 
  
                                                            
83  
OJ  L  299,  16.11.2005,  p.  62. 
84  
OJ  L  300  17.11.2005,  p.  55. 
51      
51     
TITLE  VII 
DATA  AND  INFORMATION  PROCESSED  OR  OBTAINED  BEFORE  THE  END  OF  THE  TRANSITION 
PERIOD,  OR  ON  THE  BASIS  OF  THIS  AGREEMENT 
Article  66 
Definition 
For  the  purposes  of  this  Title,  "Union  law  on  the  protection  of  personal  data"  means: 
(a)   Regulation  (EU)  2016/679,  with  the  exception  of  Chapter  VII  thereof;  
(b)  Directive  (EU)  2016/680  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 85 ; 
(c)  Directive  2002/58/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 86 ; 
(d)  any  other  provisions  of  Union  law  governing  the  protection  of  personal  data. 
Article  67 
Protection  of  personal  data 
Union  law  on  the  protection  of  personal  data  shall  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  the 
processing  of  personal  data  of  data  subjects  outside  the  United  Kingdom,  provided  that  the  personal 
data:  
(a)   were  processed  in  accordance  with  Union  law  in  the  United  Kingdom  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period;  or  
(b)  are  processed  in  the  United  Kingdom  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  on  the  basis  of 
this  Agreement. 
Article  68 
Requests  for  assistance 
Article  61(1)  to  (7)  of  Regulation  (EU)  2016/679  and  Article  50  of  Directive  (EU)  2016/680  shall  apply 
in  respect  of  requests  for  assistance  received  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
Article  69 
Confidential  treatment  and  restricted  use  of  data  and  information 
Without  prejudice  to  Article  67,  the  provisions  of  Union  law  on  confidential  treatment,  restriction  of 
use,  storage  limitation  and  requirement  to  erase  data  and  information  shall  apply  in  respect  of  data 
                                                            
85  
Directive  (EU)  2016/680  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  27  April  2016  on  the 
protection  of  natural  persons  with  regard  to  the  processing  of  personal  data  by  competent  authorities 
for  the  purposes  of  the  prevention,  investigation,  detection  or  prosecution  of  criminal  offences  or  the 
execution  of  criminal  penalties,  and  on  the  free  movement  of  such  data,  and  repealing  Council 
Framework  Decision  2008/977/JHA  (OJ  L  119,  4.5.2016,  p.  89). 
86  
Directive  2002/58/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  12  July  2002  concerning  the 
processing  of  personal  data  and  the  protection  of  privacy  in  the  electronic  communications  sector 
(Directive  on  privacy  and  electronic  communications)  (OJ  L  201,  31.7.2002  p.  37). 
52      
52     
and  information  obtained  by  the  United  Kingdom  either  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  or  on 
the  basis  of  this  Agreement. 
Article  70 
Information  security 
1.  The  provisions  of  Union  law  on  the  protection  of  EU  and  Euratom  classified  information, 
including  the  Agreement  between  the  Member  States  of  the  European  Union,  meeting  within  the 
Council,  regarding  the  protection  of  classified  information  exchanged  in  the  interests  of  the 
European  Union 87  shall  apply  in  respect  of  classified  information  obtained  by  the  United  Kingdom 
or  obtained  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  the  Union  or  a  Member  State  either  before  the  end  of 
the  transition  period  or  on  the  basis  of  this  Agreement. 
2.  The  obligations  resulting  from  Union  law  regarding  industrial  security  shall  apply  to  the  United 
Kingdom  where  the  tendering,  contracting  or  grant  award  procedure  for  classified  contracts, 
classified  subcontracts  and  classified  grant  agreements  was  launched  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period. 
3.  The  United  Kingdom  may  continue  to  use  cryptographic  products  for  the  protection  of  EU  and 
Euratom  classified  information,  provided  those  products  were  configured,  and  approved  by  the 
Union,  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
4.  Regarding  cryptographic  products  referred  to  in  paragraph  3,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  ensure 
that: 
(a)   the  cryptographic  products  used  to  protect  information  at  the  level  CONFIDENTIEL 
UE/EU  CONFIDENTIAL  and  above  are  used  solely  for  the  protection  of  information 
referred  to  in  paragraph  1; 
(b)  the  requirements  set  out  in  the  Council  decision  approving  the  cryptographic  product  are 
complied  with.  
                                                            
87  
OJ  C  202,  8.7.2011,  p.  13. 
53      
53     
TITLE  VIII 
ONGOING  PUBLIC  PROCUREMENT  AND  SIMILAR  PROCEDURES 
Article  71 
Definition 
For  the  purposes  of  this  Title,  "relevant  rules"  means  the  general  principles  of  Union  law  applicable 
to  the  award  of  public  contracts,  Directives  2009/81/EC 88 ,  2014/23/EU 89 ,  2014/24/EU 90  and 
2014/25/EU 91  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council,  Regulations  (EC)  No  2195/2002 92  and 
(EC)  No  1370/2007 93  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council,  Article  4  of  Council  Regulation 
(EEC)  No  3577/92 94 ,  Articles  11  and  12  of  Council  Directive  96/67/EC 95 ,  Articles  16,  17  and  18  of 
Regulation  (EC)  1008/2008 96  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council,  Articles  6  and  7  of 
Regulation  (EU)  2017/352 97  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council,  and  any  other  specific 
rules  of  Union  law  governing  public  procurement  procedures. 
Article  72 
Rules  applicable  to  ongoing  procedures 
1.  The  relevant  rules  shall  apply: 
(a)   without  prejudice  to  point  (b),  in  respect  of  procedures  launched  by  contracting 
authorities  or  contracting  entities  from  the  Member  States  or  the  United  Kingdom  under 
those  rules  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  not  yet  finalised  on  the  last  day 
thereof,  including  procedures  using  dynamic  purchasing  systems  as  well  as  procedures 
for  which  the  call  for  competition  takes  the  form  of  a  prior  information  notice  or  periodic 
indicative  notice  or  a  notice  on  the  existence  of  a  qualification  system; 
                                                            
88  
Directive  2009/81/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  13  July  2009  on  the 
coordination  of  procedures  for  the  award  of  certain  works  contracts,  supply  contracts  and  service 
contracts  by  contracting  authorities  or  entities  in  the  fields  of  defence  and  security,  and  amending 
Directives  2004/17/EC  and  2004/18/EC  (OJ  L  216,  20.8,  2009,  p.76). 
89  
Directive  2014/23/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  26  February  2014  on  the 
award  of  concession  contracts  (OJ  L  94,  28.3.2014,  p.  1). 
90  
Directive  2014/24/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  26  February  2014  on  public 
procurement  and  repealing  Directive  2004/18/EC  (OJ  L  94,  28.3.2014,  p.  65).  
91  
Directive  2014/25/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  26  February  2014  on 
procurement  by  entities  operating  in  the  water,  energy,  transport  and  postal  services  sectors  and 
repealing  Directive  2004/17/EC  (OJ  L  94,  28.3.2014,  p.  243). 
92  
Regulation  (EC)  No  2195/2002  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  5  November  2002  on 
the  Common  Procurement  Vocabulary  (CPV)  (OJ  L  340,  16.122002,  p.  1). 
93  
Regulation  (EC)  No  1370/2007  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  23  October  2007  on 
public  passenger  transport  services  by  rail  and  by  road  and  repealing  Council  Regulations  (EEC)  Nos 
1191/69  and  1107/70  (OJ  L  315,  3.12.2007,  p.  1). 
94  
Council  Regulation  (EEC)  No  3577/92  of  7  December  1992  applying  the  principle  of  freedom  to  provide 
services  to  maritime  transport  within  Member  States  (maritime  cabotage)  (OJ  L  364,  12.12.1992,  p.  7). 
95  
Council  Directive  96/67/EC  of  15  October  1996  on  access  to  the  groundhandling  market  at  Community 
airports  (OJ  L  272,  25.10.1996,  p.  36). 
96  
Regulation  (EC)  1008/2008  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  24  September  2008  on 
common  rules  for  the  operation  of  air  services  in  the  Community  (OJ  L  293,  31.110.2008,  p.  3). 
97  
Regulation  (EU)  2017/352  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  15  February  2017 
establishing  a  framework  for  the  provision  of  port  services  and  common  rules  on  the  financial 
transparency  of  ports  (OJ  L  57,  3.3.2017,  p.  1). 
54      
54     
(b)    in  respect  of  procedures  referred  to  in  Article  29(2),  (3)  and  (4)  of  Directive  2009/81/EC, 
Article  33(2)  to  (5)  of  Directive  2014/24/EC  and  Article  51(2)  of  Directive  2014/25/EC 
which  relate  to  the  performance  of  the  following  framework  agreements  concluded  by 
contracting  authorities  or  contracting  entities  from  the  Member  States  or  the  United 
Kingdom,  including  the  award  of  contracts  based  on  such  framework  agreements: 
(i)  framework  agreements  concluded  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  that 
have  neither  expired  nor  been  terminated  on  the  last  day  thereof;  or 
(ii)   framework  agreements  concluded  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in 
accordance  with  a  procedure  that  falls  under  point  (a)  of  this  paragraph. 
2.  Without  prejudice  to  the  application  of  any  restriction  in  accordance  with  Union  law,  the  non-­‐
discrimination  principle  shall  be  complied  with  by  contracting  authorities  and  contracting  entities 
with  regard  to  tenderers  or,  according  to  the  relevant  rules,  persons  entitled  to  otherwise  submit 
applications,  from  the  Member  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  relation  to  the  procedures 
referred  to  in  paragraph  1. 
3.  A  procedure  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  shall  be  considered  launched  when  a  call  for  competition 
or  any  other  invitation  to  submit  applications  has  been  made  in  accordance  with  the  relevant 
rules.  Where  the  relevant  rules  allow  for  the  use  of  procedures  that  do  not  require  the  use  of  a 
call  for  competition  or  other  invitations  to  submit  applications,  the  procedure  shall  be  considered 
launched  when  the  contracting  authority  or  contracting  entity  has  contacted  economic  operators 
in  relation  to  the  specific  procedure.  
4.   A  procedure  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  shall  be  considered  finalised: 
(a)   upon  publication  of  a  contract  award  notice  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  rules  or, 
where  those  rules  do  not  require  the  publication  of  a  contract  award  notice,  upon 
conclusion  of  the  relevant  contract;  or 
(b)  upon  informing  tenderers  or,  according  to  the  relevant  rules,  persons  entitled  to 
otherwise  submit  applications,  of  the  reasons  why  the  contract  was  not  awarded  if  the 
contracting  authority  or  contracting  entity  decided  not  to  award  a  contract. 
5.  This  Article  shall  not  affect  Union  or  United  Kingdom  rules  on  customs,  movement  of  goods, 
provision  of  services,  recognition  of  professional  qualifications  or  intellectual  property. 
Article  73 
Review  procedures 
Council  Directives  89/665/EEC 98  and  92/13/EEC 99  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the  public  procurement 
procedures  referred  to  in  Article  72  of  this  Agreement  which  fall  within  the  scope  of  those  Directives. 
                                                            
98  
Council  Directive  89/665/EEC  of  21  December  1989  on  the  coordination  of  the  laws,  regulations  and 
administrative  provisions  relating  to  the  application  of  review  procedures  to  the  award  of  public 
supply  and  public  works  contracts  (OJ  L  395,  30.12.1989,  p.  33).  
99  
Council  Directive  92/13/EEC  of  25  February  1992  coordinating  the  laws,  regulations  and  administrative 
provisions  relating  to  the  application  of  Community  rules  on  the  procurement  procedures  of  entities 
operating  in  the  water,  energy,  transport  and  telecommunications  sectors  (OJ  L  76,  23.3.92,  p.  14). 
55      
55     
Article  74 
Cooperation 
By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  7  of  this  Agreement,  Article  61(2)  of  Directive  2014/24/EU  shall 
apply  for  a  period  not  exceeding  9  months  from  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in  respect  of  the 
procedures  under  that  Directive  launched  by  contracting  authorities  from  the  United  Kingdom  before 
the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  not  yet  finalised  on  the  last  day  thereof.  
  
56      
56     
TITLE  IX 
EURATOM  RELATED  ISSUES 
Article  75 
Definitions 
For  the  purposes  of  this  Title,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply: 
(a) "Community"  means  the  European  Atomic  Energy  Community; 
(b) "safeguards"  means  activities  to  verify  that  nuclear  material  and  equipment  are  not  diverted 
from  their  intended  use  as  declared  by  the  users  and  that  international  legal  obligations  to 
use  nuclear  material  and  equipment  for  peaceful  purposes  are  honoured; 
(c) "special  fissile  materials"  means  special  fissile  materials  as  defined  in  Article  197(1)  of  the 
Euratom  Treaty; 
(d) "ores"  means  ores  as  defined  in  Article  197(4)  of  the  Euratom  Treaty; 
(e) "source  materials"  means  source  materials  as  defined  in  Article  197(3)  of  the  Euratom 
Treaty; 
(f) "nuclear  material"  means  ores,  source  materials  and  special  fissile  materials; 
(g) "spent  fuel  and  radioactive  waste"  means  spent  fuel  and  radioactive  waste  as  defined  in 
Articles  3(7)  and  3(11)  of  Council  Directive  2011/70/Euratom 100 . 
Article  76 
End  of  Community  responsibility  for  matters  related  to  the  United  Kingdom 
1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  have  sole  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  all  ores,  source  materials  and 
special  fissile  materials  covered  by  the  Euratom  Treaty  and  present  on  the  territory  of  the  United 
Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  are  handled  in  accordance  with  relevant  and 
applicable  international  treaties  and  conventions,  including  but  not  limited  to  international 
treaties  and  conventions  on  nuclear  safety,  safeguards,  non-­‐proliferation  and  physical  protection 
of  nuclear  materials,  and  on  safety  of  spent  fuel  management  and  the  safety  of  radioactive  waste 
management. 
2.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  have  sole  responsibility  for  ensuring  its  compliance  with  international 
obligations  arising  as  a  consequence  of  its  membership  of  the  International  Atomic  Energy 
Agency  and  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Non-­‐Proliferation  of  Nuclear  Weapons  or  any  relevant 
international  treaties  or  conventions  to  which  the  United  Kingdom  is  a  party. 
Article  77 
Safeguards 
The  United  Kingdom  shall  implement  a  safeguards  regime.  This  safeguards  regime  shall  apply  a 
system  offering  equivalent  effectiveness  and  coverage  as  that  provided  by  the  Community  in  the 
                                                            
100  
Council  Directive  2011/70/Euratom  of  19  July  2011  establishing  a  Community  framework  for  the 
responsible  and  safe  management  of  spent  fuel  and  radioactive  waste  (OJ  L  199,  2.8.2011,  p.  48).  
57      
57     
territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  line  with  the  Agreement  between  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great 
Britain  and  Northern  Ireland,  the  European  Atomic  Energy  Community  and  the  International  Atomic 
Energy  Agency  for  the  Application  of  Safeguards  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern 
Ireland  in  Connection  with  the  Treaty  on  the  Non-­‐Proliferation  of  Nuclear  Weapons  [INFCIRC/263]  as 
amended. 
Article  78 
Specific  obligations  under  international  agreements 
The  United  Kingdom  shall  ensure  that  any  specific  obligations  under  agreements  concluded  by  the 
Community  with  third  countries  or  international  organisations  relating  to  any  nuclear  equipment, 
material  or  other  nuclear  items  present  on  the  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  are  fulfilled,  or  otherwise  identify  appropriate  arrangements  in  agreement  with  the 
third  country  or  international  organisation  concerned. 
Article  79 
Ownership  and  rights  of  use  and  consumption  of  special  fissile  materials  in  the  United  Kingdom 
1.  Special  fissile  materials  present  on  the  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  which  Article 
86  of  the  Euratom  Treaty  applied  until  the  end  of  the  transition  period  shall  cease  to  be  the 
property  of  the  Community  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
2.  Special  fissile  material  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  shall  become  the  property  of  the  persons  or 
undertakings  that  had  unlimited  right  of  use  and  consumption  of  those  materials  at  the  end  of 
the  transition  period  in  accordance  with  Article  87  of  the  Euratom  Treaty.  
3.  Where  the  right  of  use  and  consumption  referred  to  in  paragraph  2  is  with  a  Member  State,  or 
with  persons  or  undertakings  established  in  the  territory  of  a  Member  State,  the  rights  of  the 
Community  arising  under  the  Euratom  Treaty  from  ownership  pursuant  to  Article  86  of  that 
Treaty  shall  be  preserved.  In  particular,  the  Community  shall  have  the  following  rights: 
(a)   the  right  to  require  that  the  materials  concerned  be  deposited  with  the  Agency 
established  under  point  (b)  of  Article  52(2)  of  the  Euratom  Treaty; 
(b)  the  right  to  approve  the  sale  of  the  materials  concerned  to  any  person  or  undertaking 
established  in  the  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  or  in  a  third  country,  before  that  sale 
takes  place; 
(c)  the  right  to  approve  any  transfer  of  the  materials  concerned  to  a  third  country  before 
that  transfer  takes  place. 
4.  Member  States,  persons  or  undertakings  that  had  the  unlimited  right  of  use  and  consumption  of 
special  fissile  materials  located  in  the  territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  shall  retain  that  right. 
58      
58     
Article  80 
Equipment  and  other  property  related  to  the  provision  of  safeguards 
1.  Community  equipment  and  other  property  related  to  the  provision  of  safeguards  under  the 
Euratom  Treaty  located  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  as  set  out  at 
[Annex  y+1]  shall  become  the  property  of  the  United  Kingdom.  The  United  Kingdom  shall 
reimburse  to  the  Union  the  value  of  that  equipment  and  other  property,  calculated  based  on  the 
value  assigned  to  that  equipment  and  other  property  in  the  consolidated  accounts  for  the  year 
2020. 
2.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  assume  all  of  the  Community's  rights,  liabilities  and  obligations 
associated  with  the  equipment  and  other  property  referred  to  in  paragraph  1. 
Article  81 
Spent  fuel  and  radioactive  waste 
Article  4(1),  (2)  and  the  first  subparagraph  of  Article  4(4)  of  Directive  2011/70/Euratom  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  the  United  Kingdom's  ultimate  responsibility  for  spent  fuel  and  radioactive  waste 
generated  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  present  on  the  territory  of  a  Member  State  at  the  end  of  the 
transition  period. 
  
59      
59     
TITLE  X 
UNION  JUDICIAL  AND  ADMINISTRATIVE  PROCEDURES 
CHAPTER  1 
Judicial  procedures 
Article  82 
Pending  cases  before  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union 
1.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall  continue  to  have  jurisdiction  for  any 
proceedings  brought  before  it  by  the  United  Kingdom  or  against  the  United  Kingdom  before  the 
end  of  the  transition  period.  That  jurisdiction  shall  extend  to  all  stages  of  proceedings,  including 
appeal  proceedings  before  the  Court  of  Justice  and  proceedings  before  the  General  Court  after  a 
case  has  been  referred  back  to  it.  
2.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall  continue  to  have  jurisdiction  to  give  preliminary 
rulings  on  requests  from  courts  and  tribunals  of  the  United  Kingdom  referred  to  it  before  the  end 
of  the  transition  period.  
3.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Chapter,  an  application  or  a  request  for  preliminary  ruling  shall  be 
considered  as  having  been,  respectively,  brought  or  referred  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the 
European  Union  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  if  the  document  initiating  the 
proceedings  has  been  registered  by  the  registry  of  the  Court  of  Justice  or  the  General  Court,  as 
the  case  may  be,  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
Article  83 
New  cases  before  the  Court  of  Justice 
1.  If  the  European  Commission  or  a  Member  State  considers  that  the  United  Kingdom  has  failed  to 
fulfil  an  obligation  under  the  Treaties  or  Part  Four  of  this  Agreement  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period,  it  may  bring  the  matter  before  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  in 
accordance  with  the  procedural  requirements  laid  down  in  Article  258  TFEU  or,  as  the  case  may 
be,  Article  259  TFEU.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall  have  jurisdiction  over  such 
cases. 
2.  Where  in  a  case  before  a  court  or  tribunal  in  the  United  Kingdom  a  question  is  raised  concerning 
the  interpretation  of  the  Treaties  or  the  validity  or  interpretation  of  acts  of  the  institutions, 
bodies,  offices  or  agencies  of  the  Union  relating  to  facts  that  occurred  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  and  where  that  court  or  tribunal  considers  that  a  decision  on  that  question  is 
necessary  to  enable  it  to  give  judgment  in  that  case,  it  may  request  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the 
European  Union  to  give  a  preliminary  ruling  on  that  question  in  accordance  with  the  procedural 
requirements  laid  down  in  Article  267  TFEU.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall 
have  jurisdiction  to  give  preliminary  rulings  on  such  requests.  
Article  84 
Procedural  rules 
The  provisions  of  Union  law  governing  the  procedure  before  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European 
Union  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the  proceedings  and  requests  for  preliminary  rulings  referred  to  in  this 
Title.  
60      
60     
Article  85 
Binding  force  and  enforceability  of  judgments  and  orders 
1.  Judgments  and  orders  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  handed  down  before  the 
end  of  the  transition  period  as  well  as  those  handed  down  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period 
in  proceedings  referred  to  in  Articles  82  and  83,  shall  have  binding  force  in  their  entirety  on  and 
in  the  United  Kingdom. 
2.  Articles  280  and  299  TFEU  shall  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  the  enforcement  of  the 
judgments  and  orders  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  of 
this  Article.  
3.  Article  260  TFEU  shall  apply  in  respect  of  compliance  by  the  United  Kingdom  with  judgments  and 
orders  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  given  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  or  pursuant  to  Articles  82(1)  and  83(1)  of  this  Agreement.  
Article  86 
Right  to  intervene  and  to  submit  written  observations 
Until  the  judgments  and  orders  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  in  all  proceedings  and 
requests  for  preliminary  rulings  referred  to  in  Article  82  have  become  final,  the  United  Kingdom  may 
intervene  and  submit  written  observations  in  other  cases  before  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European 
Union  in  the  same  way  as  Member  States.  During  that  period,  the  Registrar  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of 
the  European  Union  shall  notify  the  United  Kingdom,  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  Member  States,  of  any  case  referred  to  the  Court  of  Justice  by  a  court  or  tribunal  of  a  Member 
State.  
Article  87 
Representation  before  the  Court 
1.  Where,  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  a  lawyer  authorised  to  practise  before  the  courts 
of  the  United  Kingdom  represented  or  assisted  a  party  before  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the 
European  Union  in  proceedings  brought  before  it  or  in  requests  for  preliminary  rulings  referred 
to  it  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  this  lawyer  may  continue  to  represent  or  assist  that 
party  in  those  proceedings  or  requests.  This  right  shall  extend  to  all  stages  of  proceedings, 
including  appeal  proceedings  before  the  Court  of  Justice  and  proceedings  before  the  General 
Court  after  a  case  has  been  referred  back  to  it. 
2.  Lawyers  authorised  to  practise  before  the  courts  of  the  United  Kingdom  may  represent  or  assist  a 
party  before  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  in  the  cases  referred  to  in  Article  83. 
61      
61     
CHAPTER  2 
Administrative  procedures 
Article  88 
Ongoing  administrative  procedures 
1.  The  institutions,  bodies,  offices  and  agencies  of  the  Union  shall  continue  to  be  competent  for 
administrative  procedures  concerning  compliance  with  Union  law  by  the  United  Kingdom  and 
natural  and  legal  persons  residing  or  established  in  the  United  Kingdom,  which  were  initiated 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period.  
2.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Chapter,  an  administrative  procedure  shall  be  considered  as  having  been 
initiated  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  if  it  has  been  formally  registered  with  the  Union 
institution,  body,  office  or  agency  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
Article  89 
New  administrative  procedures 
The  institutions,  bodies,  offices  and  agencies  of  the  Union  shall  be  competent  to  initiate  new 
administrative  procedures  concerning  compliance  with  Union  law  by  the  United  Kingdom  and  natural 
and  legal  persons  residing  or  established  in  the  United  Kingdom,  where  the  facts  forming  the  subject 
matter  of  the  administrative  procedure  occurred  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period.  
Article  90 
Procedural  rules 
The  provisions  of  Union  law  governing  the  different  types  of  administrative  procedures  covered  by 
this  Chapter  shall  apply  to  the  procedures  referred  to  in  Articles  88  and  89.  
Article  91 
Binding  force  and  enforceability  of  decisions 
1.  Decisions  adopted  by  institutions,  bodies,  offices  and  agencies  of  the  Union  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period,  or  in  the  procedures  referred  to  in  Articles  88  and  89,  and  addressed  to  the 
United  Kingdom  or  to  natural  and  legal  persons  residing  or  established  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
shall  be  binding  on  and  in  the  United  Kingdom.  
2.  The  legality  of  a  decision  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  may  be  reviewed  exclusively  by  the  Court  of 
Justice  of  the  European  Union  in  accordance  with  Article  263  TFEU.  
3.  Article  299  TFEU  shall  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  the  enforcement  of  decisions 
referred  to  in  paragraph  1  that  impose  pecuniary  obligations  on  natural  and  legal  persons 
residing  or  established  in  the  United  Kingdom.  
4.  If  the  United  Kingdom  does  not  comply  with  a  decision  referred  to  in  paragraph  1,  or  fails  to  give 
legal  effect  in  the  United  Kingdom's  legal  order  to  a  decision  referred  to  in  that  paragraph 
addressed  to  a  natural  or  legal  person  residing  or  established  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Union 
or  a  Member  State  may  refer  the  matter  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  in 
accordance  with  the  procedural  requirements  laid  down  in  Article  258  TFEU  or,  as  the  case  may 
62      
62     
be,  in  Article  259  TFEU.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall  have  jurisdiction  over 
such  cases.  Articles  84,  85  and  87  of  this  Agreement  shall  apply. 
Article  92 
Other  ongoing  procedures 
1.  Technical  examinations  conducted  by  United  Kingdom  Examination  Offices  in  cooperation  with 
the  Community  Plant  Variety  Office  pursuant  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  2100/94  which  were  ongoing 
on  the  day  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  shall  continue  and  be  concluded 
in  compliance  with  that  Regulation. 
2.  Article  12(3)  and  Articles  14,  15  and  16  of  Directive  2003/87/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and 
of  the  Council 101  shall  apply  to  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  greenhouse  gases  emitted 
during  the  last  year  of  the  transition  period.  
By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  7  of  this  Agreement,  the  United  Kingdom  and  operators  in  the 
United  Kingdom  shall  have  access,  to  the  extent  necessary  to  comply  with  the  first  subparagraph 
of  this  paragraph  to  the  Union  registry  established  by  Commission  Regulation  (EU)  No 
389/2013 102 . 
  
                                                            
101  
Directive  2003/87/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  13  October  2003  establishing  a 
scheme  for  greenhouse  gas  emission  allowance  trading  within  the  Community  and  amending  Council 
Directive  96/61/EC  (OJ  L  275,  25.10.2003,  p.  32). 
102  
Commission  Regulation  (EU)  No  389/2013  of  2  May  2013  establishing  a  Union  Registry  pursuant  to 
Directive  2003/87/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council,  Decisions  No  280/2004/EC  and 
No  406/2009/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  and  repealing  Commission  Regulations 
(EU)  No  920/2010  and  No  1193/2011  (OJ  L  122,  3.5.2013,  p.  1). 
63      
63     
TITLE  XI 
ADMINISTRATIVE  COOPERATION  PROCEDURES 
Article  93 
Administrative  cooperation  for  customs 
1.  Administrative  cooperation  procedures  between  a  Member  State  and  the  United  Kingdom  set 
out  in  [Annex  y+2]  that  were  launched  in  accordance  with  Union  law  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  shall  be  completed  by  that  Member  State  and  the  United  Kingdom  in 
accordance  with  the  relevant  provisions  of  Union  law.  
2.  Administrative  cooperation  procedures  between  a  Member  State  and  the  United  Kingdom  set 
out  in  [Annex  y+2]  that  are  launched  within  a  period  of  3  years  after  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  but  concern  facts  that  occurred  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  shall  be  completed 
by  that  Member  State  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  provisions  of 
Union  law. 
Article  94 
Administrative  cooperation  for  matters  related  to  indirect  tax 
1.  Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  904/2010 103  shall  apply  until  5  years  after  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  in  respect  of  cooperation  between  the  competent  authorities  responsible  for  the 
application  of  the  laws  on  value  added  tax  in  the  Member  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  in 
relation  to  transactions  that  took  place  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
2.  Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  389/2012 104  shall  apply  until  5  years  after  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  in  respect  of  cooperation  between  the  competent  authorities  responsible  for  the 
application  of  the  legislation  on  excise  duties  in  the  Member  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  in 
relation  to  movement  of  excise  goods  that  took  place  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
Article  95 
Mutual  assistance  for  the  recovery  of  claims  relating  to  taxes,  duties  and  other  measures 
Council  Directive  2010/24/EU 105 shall  apply  until  5  years  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period 
between  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  claims  related  to  amounts  that  became  due 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period.  
  
                                                            
103  
Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  904/2010  of  7  October  2010  on  administrative  cooperation  and  combating 
fraud  in  the  field  of  value  added  tax  (OJ  L  268,  12.10.2018,  p.  1). 
104  
Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  389/2012  of  2  May  2012  on  administrative  cooperation  in  the  field  of 
excise  duties  and  repealing  Regulation  (EC)  No  2073/2004  (OJ  L  121,  8.5.2012,  p.  1). 
105  
Council  Directive  2010/24/EU  of  16  March  2010  concerning  mutual  assistance  for  the  recovery  of 
claims  relating  to  taxes,  duties  and  other  measures  (OJ  L  84,  31.3.2010,  p.  1). 
64      
64     
TITLE  XII 
PRIVILEGES  AND  IMMUNITIES 
Article  96 
Definitions 
1.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Title,  "members  of  the  institutions"  means,  irrespective  of  their 
nationality,  the  President  of  the  European  Council,  the  members  of  the  European  Commission, 
the  Judges,  the  Advocates-­‐General,  the  Registrars  and  the  Assistant  Rapporteurs  of  the  Court  of 
Justice  of  the  European  Union,  the  members  of  the  Court  of  Auditors,  the  members  of  the  organs 
of  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  members  of  the  organs  of  the  European  Investment  Bank,  as 
well  as  all  other  persons  assimilated  to  any  of  those  categories  of  persons  under  Union  law  for 
the  purposes  of  Protocol  (No  7)  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  of  the  European  Union 
(“Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities”).  The  term  "members  of  the  institutions"  does  not 
include  members  of  the  European  Parliament. 
2.  Regulation  (EURATOM,  ECSC,  EEC)  No  549/69  of  the  Council 106  shall  apply  to  determine  the 
categories  of  officials  and  other  servants  covered  by  Articles  105  to  108  of  this  Agreement. 
CHAPTER  1 
Property,  funds,  assets  and  operations  of  the  Union 
Article  97 
Inviolability 
Article  1  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  respect  of  premises, 
buildings,  property  and  assets  of  the  Union  in  the  United  Kingdom  used  by  the  European  Union 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  until  they  are  no  longer  in  official  use  or  have  been  removed 
from  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Union  shall  notify  the  United  Kingdom  when  its  premises,  buildings, 
property  or  assets  are  no  longer  in  such  use  or  have  been  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom. 
Article  98 
Archives 
Article  2  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  respect  of  all  archives  of  the 
Union  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  until  they  have  been  removed  from 
the  United  Kingdom.  The  Union  shall  notify  the  United  Kingdom  of  the  removal  of  any  of  its  archives 
from  the  United  Kingdom. 
                                                            
106  
Regulation  (EURATOM,  ECSC,  EEC)  No  549/69  of  the  Council  of  25  March  1969  determining  the 
categories  of  officials  and  other  servants  of  the  European  Communities  to  whom  the  provisions  of 
Article  12,  the  second  paragraph  of  Article  13  and  Article  14  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and 
Immunities  of  the  Communities  apply  (OJ  L  74,  27.3.1969,  p.  1. 
65      
65     
Article  99 
Taxation 
Article  3  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the  Union's  assets, 
revenues  and  other  property  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  until  they  are 
no  longer  in  official  use  or  have  been  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom.  
CHAPTER  2 
Communications 
Article  100 
Communications 
Article  5  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom  in 
respect  of  the  official  communications,  official  correspondence,  and  transmission  of  documents  in 
relation  to  activities  of  the  Union  pursuant  to  this  Agreement. 
CHAPTER  3 
Members  of  the  European  Parliament 
Article  101 
Immunity  of  members  of  the  European  Parliament 
Article  8  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom  in 
respect  of  opinions  expressed  or  votes  cast,  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  by  members  of 
the  European  Parliament,  irrespective  of  their  nationality,  including  former  members,  in  the 
performance  of  their  duties. 
Article  102 
Social  security 
Former  members  of  the  European  Parliament,  irrespective  of  their  nationality,  drawing  a  pension  in 
this  capacity,  as  well  as  persons  entitled  to  the  survivor's  pension  related  thereto,  shall  be  exempted 
from  obligatory  affiliation  to  and  payment  into  national  social  security  systems  in  the  United 
Kingdom,  under  the  same  conditions  as  were  applicable  on  the  last  day  of  the  transition  period, 
provided  that  they  were  members  of  the  European  Parliament  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period. 
Article  103 
Avoidance  of  double  taxation  on  pensions  and  transitional  allowances 
Articles  12,  13  and  14  of  Decision  2005/684/EC,  Euratom  of  the  European  Parliament 107  shall  apply  in 
the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  pensions  and  transitional  allowances  paid  to  former  members  of 
the  European  Parliament,  irrespective  of  their  nationality,  and  Article  17  of  that  Decision  shall  apply 
                                                            
107  
Decision  2005/684/EC,  Euratom  of  the  European  Parliament  of  28  September  2005  adopting  the 
Statute  for  Members  of  the  European  Parliament  (OJ  L  262,  7.10.2005,  p.  1). 
66      
66     
in  respect  of  persons  entitled  to  the  survivor's  pension,  irrespective  of  their  nationality,  to  the  extent 
that  the  entitlement  to  a  pension  or  transitional  allowance  was  earned  before  the  end  of  the 
transition  period. 
CHAPTER  4 
Representatives  of  Member  States  and  of  the  United  Kingdom  taking  part  in  the  work  of  the 
institutions  of  the  Union 
Article  104 
Privileges,  immunities  and  facilities  
1. Article  10  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom  in 
respect  of  representatives  of  Member  States  and  of  the  United  Kingdom  taking  part  in  the  work 
of  the  institutions,  agencies,  offices  and  bodies  of  the  Union,  their  advisers  and  technical  experts, 
and  members  of  the  advisory  bodies  of  the  Union,  irrespective  of  their  nationality,  as  regards 
their  participation  in  that  work: 
(a)   that  took  place  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
(b)    that  takes  place  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in  connection  with  activities  of  the 
Union  pursuant  to  this  Agreement.  
2. Article  10  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  the  Union  in  respect  of 
representatives  of  the  United  Kingdom  taking  part  in  the  work  of  the  institutions,  agencies, 
offices  and  bodies  of  the  Union,  their  advisers  and  technical  experts,  as  regards  their 
participation  in  that  work: 
(a)   that  took  place  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
(b)    that  takes  place  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in  connection  with  activities  of  the 
Union  pursuant  to  this  Agreement. 
CHAPTER  5 
Members  of  the  institutions,  officials  and  other  servants 
Article  105 
Privileges  and  Immunities 
1. Article  11(a)  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom 
in  respect  of  acts  performed  by  members  of  the  institutions,  officials  and  other  servants  of  the 
Union  of  any  nationality  in  their  official  capacity,  and  former  members,  former  officials  and 
former  other  servants,  including  their  words  spoken  or  written: 
(a)   before  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
(b)    after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in  connection  with  activities  of  the  Union  pursuant 
to  this  Agreement.  
2. The  first,  second  and  third  paragraphs  of  Article  3  of  Protocol  (No  3)  on  the  Statute  of  the  Court 
of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  the  Judges  of  the 
Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  and  the  Advocates-­‐General  until  the  decisions  of  the 
Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  in  all  proceedings  and  requests  for  preliminary  rulings 
67      
67     
referred  to  in  Articles  82  and  83  have  become  final,  and  thereafter,  including  in  respect  of  former 
Judges  and  former  Advocates-­‐General,  as  regards  all  acts  performed  by  them  in  their  official 
capacity,  including  words  spoken  or  written,  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  or  in  relation 
to  the  proceedings  referred  to  in  Articles  82  and  83. 
3. Article  11(b)  to  (e)  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  the  United 
Kingdom  in  respect  of  officials  and  other  servants  of  the  Union,  of  any  nationality,  as  well  as  their 
spouses  and  dependent  members  of  their  families,  irrespective  of  their  nationality,  if  those 
officials  and  other  servants  entered  the  service  of  the  Union  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period,  until  those  persons  have  completed  their  relocation  to  the  Union. 
Article  106 
Taxation 
Article  12  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom  in 
respect  of  members  of  the  institutions,  officials  and  other  servants  of  the  Union  of  any  nationality, 
including  former  members,  former  officials  and  former  other  servants,  who  entered  the  service  of 
the  Union  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  provided  that  the  persons  concerned  are  liable  to 
pay  a  tax  for  the  benefit  of  the  Union  on  salaries,  wages,  emoluments  and  pensions  paid  to  them  by 
the  Union. 
Article  107 
Domicile  for  tax  purposes 
1. Article  13  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  respect  of  members  of 
the  institutions,  officials  and  other  servants  of  the  Union,  of  any  nationality,  who  entered  the 
service  of  the  Union  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  as  well  as  a  spouse  not  separately 
engaged  in  a  gainful  occupation,  and  children  dependent  on  and  in  the  care  of  such  a  member, 
official  or  other  servant,  irrespective  of  their  nationality. 
2. Paragraph  1  shall  apply  only  in  respect  of  persons  who  established  their  residence  in  a  Member 
State  solely  by  reason  of  the  performance  of  their  duties  in  the  service  of  the  Union  and  who  had 
their  domicile  for  tax  purposes  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  time  of  entering  the  service  of  the 
Union,  as  well  as  persons  who  established  their  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  solely  by  reason 
of  the  performance  of  their  duties  in  the  service  of  the  Union  and  who  had  their  domicile  for  tax 
purposes  in  a  Member  State  at  the  time  of  entering  the  service  of  the  Union.  
Article  108 
Social  security  contributions 
Members  of  the  institutions,  officials  and  other  servants  of  the  Union,  including  former  members, 
former  officials  and  former  other  servants,  of  any  nationality,  who  entered  the  service  of  the  Union 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  and  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  a  spouse  not 
separately  engaged  in  a  gainful  occupation,  and  children  dependent  on  and  in  the  care  of  such  a 
member,  official  or  other  servant,  irrespective  of  their  nationality,  shall  be  exempted  from  obligatory 
affiliation  to  and  payment  into  national  social  security  systems  in  the  United  Kingdom,  under  the 
same  conditions  as  were  applicable  on  the  last  day  of  the  transition  period,  provided  that  the 
persons  concerned  are  affiliated  to  the  social  security  scheme  of  the  Union.  
68      
68     
Article  109 
Transfer  of  pension  rights 
In  respect  of  officials  and  other  servants  of  the  Union,  including  former  officials  and  former  other 
servants,  of  any  nationality,  who  entered  the  service  of  the  Union  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  and  who  seek  to  transfer  pension  rights  out  of  or  into  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  Article 
11(1),  (2)  or  (3)  and  Article  12  of  Annex  VIII  to  the  Staff  Regulations  of  Officials  of  the  European 
Union 108  or  Articles  39,  109  and  135  of  the  Conditions  of  Employment  of  Other  Servants  of  the 
European  Union,  the  obligations  incumbent  on  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  the  same  as  those 
existing  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
Article  110 
Unemployment  insurance 
Articles  28a,  96,  and  136  of  the  Conditions  of  Employment  of  Other  Servants  of  the  European  Union 
shall  apply  in  respect  of  other  servants  of  the  Union,  including  former  other  servants,  of  any 
nationality,  who  contributed  to  the  Union's  unemployment  scheme  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  if  they  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  are  registered  with  the  unemployment  authorities  of 
the  United  Kingdom  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
CHAPTER  6 
Other  provisions 
Article  111 
Waiver  of  immunities  and  cooperation 
1. Articles  17  and  18  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in  respect  of 
privileges,  immunities  and  facilities  accorded  by  this  Title.  
2. When  taking  a  decision  under  Article  17  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  on 
whether  to  waive  immunity  upon  the  request  of  the  authorities  of  the  United  Kingdom,  the 
Union  shall  afford  the  same  consideration  as  it  affords  to  requests  from  the  authorities  of  the 
Member  States  in  comparable  situations.  
3. Upon  the  request  of  the  authorities  of  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Union  shall  notify  those 
authorities  of  the  status  of  any  person  which  is  relevant  to  their  entitlement  to  a  privilege  or 
immunity  under  this  Title. 
                                                            
108  
Staff  Regulations  of  Officials  of  the  European  Union  as  laid  down  in  Council  Regulation  (EEC,  Euratom, 
ECSC)  No  259/68  of  29  February  1968  laying  down  the  Staff  Regulations  and  the  Conditions  of 
Employment  of  Other  Servants  of  the  European  Communities  and  instituting  special  measures 
temporarily  applicable  to  officials  of  the  Commission  (OJ  L  56,  4.3.1968,  p.  1). 
69      
69     
Article  112 
European  Central  Bank 
1. This  Title  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (“ECB”),  the  members  of  its  organs, 
its  staff,  and  representatives  of  the  national  central  banks  in  the  European  System  of  Central 
Banks  taking  part  in  its  activities.  
2. The  second  paragraph  of  Article  22  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  the  ECB,  the  members  of  its  organs,  its  staff,  representatives  of  the  national  central 
banks  in  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  taking  part  in  its  activities,  and  any  property, 
assets  and  operations  of  the  ECB  in  the  United  Kingdom  held,  managed  or  conducted  pursuant  to 
Protocol  (No  4)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  and  of  the  European 
Central  Bank.  
3. Paragraph  2  shall  apply  in  respect  of: 
(a)   such  property  and  assets  of  the  ECB  that  are  held  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of 
the  transition  period;  and 
(b)    such  operations,  and  ancillary  activities  related  thereto,  of  the  ECB  in  the  United 
Kingdom  or  with  United  Kingdom  counterparts  that  were  ongoing  at  the  end  of  the 
transition  period,  or  that  are  initiated  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  as  part  of  its 
activities  to  sustain  operations  that  were  ongoing  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period, 
until  their  final  maturity,  disposal  or  completion. 
Article  113 
European  Investment  Bank 
1. This  Title  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the  European  Investment  Bank  (“EIB”),  the  members  of  its 
organs,  its  staff  and  representatives  of  the  Member  States  taking  part  in  its  activities,  as  well  as 
to  any  subsidiaries  and  other  entities  established  by  the  EIB  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  in  accordance  with  Article  28(1)  of  Protocol  (No  5)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European 
Investment  Bank,  notably  the  European  Investment  Fund. 
2. The  second  paragraph  of  Article  21  of  the  Protocol  on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  the  EIB,  the  members  of  its  organs,  its  staff  and  representatives  of  the  Member  States 
taking  part  in  its  activities,  as  well  as  to  any  subsidiaries  and  other  entities  established  by  the  EIB 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in  accordance  with  Article  28(1)  of  Protocol  (No  5)  on  the 
Statute  of  the  European  Investment  Bank,  notably  the  European  Investment  Fund.  
3. Paragraph  2  shall  apply  in  respect  of: 
(a) such  property  and  assets  of  the  EIB  or  of  any  subsidiaries  and  other  entities  established 
by  the  EIB  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in  accordance  with  Article  28(1)  of 
Protocol  (No  5)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European  Investment  Bank,  notably  the  European 
Investment  Fund,  that  are  held  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
and 
(b) such  borrowing,  financing,  guarantee,  investment,  treasury  and  technical  assistance 
operations,  and  ancillary  activities  related  thereto,  of  the  EIB  or  any  subsidiaries  and 
other  entities  established  by  the  EIB  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in 
accordance  with  Article  28(1)  of  Protocol  (No  5)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European 
Investment  Bank,  notably  the  European  Investment  Fund,  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  with 
70      
70     
United  Kingdom  counterparts,  that  were  ongoing  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  or 
that  are  initiated  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  as  part  of  their  activities  to 
sustain  operations  that  were  ongoing  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  until  their  final 
maturity,  disposure,  or  completion. 
Article  114 
Host  Agreements 
The  Headquarters  Agreement  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  European  Banking  Authority  of  8 
May  2012,  the  Exchange  of  Letters  concerning  the  Application  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  the  Protocol 
on  the  Privileges  and  Immunities  of  the  European  Communities  to  the  European  Agency  for  the 
Evaluation  of  Medicinal  Products  of  24  June  1996,  and  the  Agreement  on  the  Hosting  of  the  Galileo 
Security  Monitoring  Centre  of  17  July  2013  shall  apply,  respectively,  to  the  European  Banking 
Authority,  the  European  Medicines  Agency  and  the  Galileo  Security  Monitoring  Centre  until  their 
relocation  to  a  Member  State  is  completed.  The  notification  by  the  Union  of  the  completion  date  of 
the  relocation  will  constitute  the  termination  date  of  the  aforementioned  host  agreements.    
71      
71     
TITLE  XIII 
OTHER  ISSUES  RELATING  TO  THE  FUNCTIONING  OF  THE  INSTITUTIONS,  BODIES,  OFFICES  AND 
AGENCIES  OF  THE  UNION 
Article  115 
Obligation  of  professional  secrecy 
Article  339  TFEU  and  other  provisions  of  Union  law  imposing  an  obligation  of  professional  secrecy  on 
certain  individuals  and  institutions,  agencies,  offices  and  bodies  of  the  Union  shall  apply  in  the  United 
Kingdom  in  respect  of  any  information  of  the  kind  covered  by  the  obligation  of  professional  secrecy 
obtained  either  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  or  thereafter  in  connection  with  activities  of 
the  Union  pursuant  to  this  Agreement.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  respect  those  obligations  of 
individuals  and  institutions,  agencies,  offices  and  bodies  and  ensure  that  they  are  complied  with  in  its 
territory. 
Article  116 
Obligation  of  professional  discretion 
Article  19  of  the  Staff  Regulations  of  Officials  of  the  European  Union  and  other  provisions  of  Union 
law  imposing  an  obligation  of  professional  discretion  on  certain  individuals  shall  apply  in  the  United 
Kingdom  in  respect  of  any  information  obtained  either  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  or 
thereafter  in  connection  with  activities  of  the  Union  pursuant  to  this  Agreement.  The  United 
Kingdom  shall  respect  those  obligations  of  individuals  and  ensure  that  they  are  complied  with  in  its 
territory. 
Article  117 
Access  to  documents 
1. For  the  purposes  of  the  relevant  provisions  of  Union  law  on  access  to  documents  of  the 
institutions,  agencies,  offices  and  bodies  of  the  Union,  all  references  to  Member  States  and  their 
authorities  shall  be  read  as  including  the  United  Kingdom  and  its  authorities  in  respect  of 
documents  drawn  up  by  or  obtained  by  the  institutions,  agencies,  offices  and  bodies  of  the  Union 
before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  or  thereafter  in  connection  with  activities  of  the  Union 
pursuant  to  this  Agreement.  
2.  Article  5  and  Article  9(5)  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  1049/2001  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council 109  and  Article  5  of  Decision  ECB/2004/3  of  the  European  Central  Bank 110  shall  apply  in  the 
United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  all  documents  falling  within  the  scope  of  those  provisions  obtained 
by  the  United  Kingdom  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  or  thereafter  in  connection  with 
activities  of  the  Union  pursuant  to  this  Agreement. 
                                                            
109  
Regulation  (EC)  No  1049/2001  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  30  May  2001 
regarding  public  access  to  European  Parliament,  Council  and  Commission  documents  (OJ  L  145, 
31.5.2001,  p.  43). 
110  
Decision  of  the  European  Central  Bank  of  4  March  2004  on  public  access  to  European  Central  Bank 
documents  (ECB/2004/3)  (2004/258/EC)  (OJ  L  80,  18.3.2004,  p.  42). 
72      
72     
Article  118 
European  Central  Bank 
1. Articles  9.1,  17,  35.1,  35.2,  and  35.4  of  Protocol  (No  4)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European  System  of 
Central  Banks  and  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the  ECB,  the  members 
of  its  organs,  its  staff,  representatives  of  the  national  central  banks  in  the  European  System  of 
Central  Banks  taking  part  in  its  activities,  and  any  property,  assets  and  operations  of  the  ECB  in 
the  United  Kingdom  held,  managed  or  conducted  pursuant  to  Protocol  (No  4)  on  the  Statute  of 
the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  and  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  The  ECB  shall  be 
exempt  from  the  necessity  to  register  or  to  obtain  any  form  of  licence,  permit  or  other 
authorisation  or  permission  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  carry  out  its  operations. 
2. Paragraph  1  shall  apply  in  respect  of: 
(a)   such  property  and  assets  of  the  ECB  that  are  held  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of 
the  transition  period;  and 
(b)    such  operations,  and  ancillary  activities  related  thereto,  of  the  ECB  in  the  United 
Kingdom  or  with  United  Kingdom  counterparts  that  were  ongoing  at  the  end  of  the 
transition  period,  or  that  are  initiated  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period  as  part  of  its 
activities  to  sustain  operations  that  were  ongoing  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period, 
until  their  final  maturity,  disposal  or  completion. 
Article  119 
European  Investment  Bank 
1. Articles  13,  20(2),  23(1),  23(4)  and  26  and  the  first  paragraph  of  Article  27  of  Protocol  (No  5)  on 
the  Statute  of  the  European  Investment  Bank  shall  apply  in  respect  of  the  EIB,  the  members  of  its 
organs,  its  staff  and  representatives  of  the  Member  States  taking  part  in  its  activities,  as  well  as 
to  any  subsidiaries  and  other  entities  established  by  the  EIB  before  the  end  of  the  transition 
period  in  accordance  with  Article  28(1)  of  Protocol  (No  5)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European 
Investment  Bank,  notably  the  European  Investment  Fund.  The  EIB  and  the  European  Investment 
Fund  shall  be  exempt  from  the  necessity  to  register,  or  to  obtain  any  form  of  licence,  permit  or 
other  authorisation  or  permission  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  carry  out  their  operations.  The 
currency  of  the  United  Kingdom  shall  remain  freely  transferable  and  convertible,  subject  to 
Article  23(2)  of  Protocol  (No  5)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European  Investment  Bank  in  respect  of 
convertibility  of  the  currency  of  the  United  Kingdom  into  a  currency  of  a  non-­‐Member  State,  for 
the  purposes  of  such  operations. 
2. Paragraph  1  shall  apply  in  respect  of: 
(a) such  property  and  assets  of  the  EIB  or  of  any  subsidiaries  and  other  entities  established 
by  the  EIB  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in  accordance  with  Article  28(1)  of 
Protocol  (No  5)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European  Investment  Bank,  notably  the  European 
Investment  Fund,  that  are  held  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period; 
and 
(b) such  borrowing,  financing,  guarantee,  investment,  treasury  and  technical  assistance 
operations,  and  ancillary  activities  related  thereto,  of  the  EIB  or  any  subsidiaries  and 
other  entities  established  by  the  EIB  before  the  end  of  the  transition  period  in 
accordance  with  Article  28(1)  of  Protocol  (No  5)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European 
Investment  Bank,  notably  the  European  Investment  Fund,  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  with 
73      
73     
United  Kingdom  counterparts,  that  were  ongoing  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  or 
that  are  initiated  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  as  part  of  their  activities  to 
sustain  operations  that  were  ongoing  at  the  end  of  the  transition  period  until  their  final 
maturity,  disposure,  or  completion. 
Article  120 
European  Schools 
1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  be  bound  by  the  Convention  defining  the  Statute  of  the  European 
Schools 111 ,  as  well  as  by  the  Regulations  on  Accredited  European  Schools  adopted  by  the  Board 
of  Governors  of  the  European  Schools,  until  the  end  of  the  school  year  that  is  ongoing  at  the  end 
of  the  transition  period*. 
2.  The  United  Kingdom  shall,  with  respect  to  pupils  who  before  31  August  2021  acquired  a 
European  baccalaureate  and  to  pupils  who  are  enrolled  in  a  cycle  of  secondary  studies  in  a 
European  School  before  31  August  2021  and  acquire  a  European  baccalaureate  after  that  date, 
ensure  that  they  enjoy  the  rights  provided  for  in  Article  5(2)  of  the  Convention  defining  the 
Statute  of  the  European  Schools. 
  
                                                            
111  
OJ  L  212,  17.8.1994,  p.  3. 
*   Explanatory  note:  i.e.  until  31  August  2021. 
74      
74     
PART  FOUR 
TRANSITION 
Article  121 
Transition  period 
There  shall  be  a  transition  or  implementation  period,  which  shall  start  on  the  date  of  entry  into  force 
of  this  Agreement  and  end  on  31  December  2020. 
Article  122 
Scope  of  the  transition 
1. Unless  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement,  Union  law  shall  be  applicable  to  and  in  the  United 
Kingdom  during  the  transition  period. 
However,  the  following  provisions  of  the  Treaties  and  acts  adopted  by  the  institutions,  bodies, 
offices  or  agencies  of  the  Union  shall  not  be  applicable  to  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  during  the 
transition  period: 
(a)   provisions  of  the  Treaties  and  acts  which,  pursuant  to  Protocol  (No  15)  on  certain 
provisions  relating  to  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland,  Protocol 
(No  19)  on  the  Schengen  acquis  integrated  into  the  framework  of  the  European  Union  or 
Protocol  (No  21)  on  the  position  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  Ireland  in  respect  of  the  area 
of  freedom,  security  and  justice,  or  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the  Treaties  on 
enhanced  cooperation,  were  not  binding  upon  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  before  the 
date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  as  well  as  acts  amending  such  acts; 
(b)    Article  11(4)  TEU,  Articles  20(2)(b),  22  and  the  first  paragraph  of  Article  24  TFEU,  Articles 
39  and  40  of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union,  and  acts  adopted 
on  the  basis  of  those  provisions. 
2. Should  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  reach  an  agreement  governing  their  future 
relationship  in  the  area  of  the  Common  Foreign  and  Security  Policy  and  the  Common  Security 
and  Defence  Policy  which  becomes  applicable  during  the  transition  period,  Chapter  2  of  Title  V  of 
the  TEU  and  the  acts  adopted  on  the  basis  of  those  provisions  shall  cease  to  apply  to  the  United 
Kingdom  from  the  date  of  application  of  that  agreement.  
3. During  the  transition  period,  the  Union  law  applicable  pursuant  to  paragraph  1  shall  produce  in 
respect  of  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  same  legal  effects  as  those  which  it  produces  within 
the  Union  and  its  Member  States  and  shall  be  interpreted  and  applied  in  accordance  with  the 
same  methods  and  general  principles  as  those  applicable  within  the  Union. 
4. The  United  Kingdom  shall  not  participate  in  any  enhanced  cooperation: 
(a)   in  relation  to  which  authorisation  has  been  granted  after  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of 
this  Agreement;  or 
(b)    within  the  framework  of  which  no  acts  have  been  adopted  before  the  date  of  entry  into 
force  of  this  Agreement. 
5. During  the  transition  period,  in  relation  to  measures  which  amend,  build  upon  or  replace  an 
existing  measure  adopted  pursuant  to  Title  V  of  Part  Three  of  the  TFEU  by  which  the  United 
Kingdom  is  bound  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  Article  5  of  Protocol  (No 
75      
75     
19)  on  the  Schengen  acquis  integrated  into  the  framework  of  the  European  Union  and  Article  4a 
of  Protocol  (No  21)  on  the  position  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  Ireland  in  respect  of  the  area  of 
freedom,  security  and  justice  shall  continue  to  apply  mutatis  mutandis.  The  United  Kingdom 
shall,  however,  not  have  the  right  to  notify  its  wish  to  take  part  in  the  application  of  new 
measures  pursuant  to  Title  V  of  Part  Three  of  the  TFEU  other  than  those  referred  to  in  Article  4a 
of  Protocol  No  21.  
In  order  to  support  continuing  cooperation  between  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom,  under 
the  conditions  set  out  for  cooperation  with  third  countries  in  the  relevant  measures,  the  Union 
may  invite  the  United  Kingdom  to  cooperate  in  relation  to  new  measures  adopted  under  Title  V 
of  Part  III  TFEU. 
6. Unless  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement,  during  the  transition  period,  any  reference  to 
Member  States  in  the  Union  law  applicable  pursuant  to  paragraph  1,  including  as  implemented 
and  applied  by  Member  States,  shall  be  understood  as  including  the  United  Kingdom. 
7. By  way  of  derogation  from  paragraph  6: 
(a)   for  the  purposes  of  Articles  42(6)  and  46  TEU  and  of  Protocol  (No  10)  on  permanent 
structured  cooperation  established  by  Article  42  of  the  Treaty  on  European  Union,  any 
references  to  Member  States  shall  be  understood  as  not  including  the  United  Kingdom. 
This  shall  not  preclude  the  possibility  for  the  United  Kingdom  to  be  invited  to  participate 
as  a  third  country  in  individual  projects  under  the  conditions  set  out  in  Council  Decision 
(CFSP)  2017/2315 112  on  an  exceptional  basis,  or  in  any  other  form  of  cooperation  to  the 
extent  allowed  and  under  the  conditions  set  out  by  future  Union  acts  adopted  on  the 
basis  of  Articles  42(6)  and  46  TEU; 
(b)  where  acts  of  the  Union  provide  for  the  participation  of  Member  States,  nationals  of 
Member  States  or  natural  or  legal  persons  residing  or  established  in  a  Member  State  in 
an  information  exchange,  procedure  or  programme  which  continues  to  be  implemented 
or  starts  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  and  where  such  participation  would  grant 
access  to  security  related  sensitive  information  that  only  Member  States  (or  nationals  of 
Member  States,  or  natural  or  legal  persons  residing  or  established  in  a  Member  State) 
are  to  have  knowledge  of,  in  such  exceptional  circumstances  the  references  to  Member 
States  in  such  Union  acts  shall  be  understood  as  not  including  the  United  Kingdom.  The 
Union  shall  notify  the  United  Kingdom  of  the  application  of  this  derogation; 
(c)  for  the  purposes  of  the  recruitment  of  officials  and  other  servants  of  the  institutions, 
bodies,  offices  or  agencies  of  the  Union,  any  references  to  Member  States  in  Articles  27 
and  28(a)  of  the  Staff  Regulations  and  in  Article  1  of  Annex  X  thereto  and  in  Articles  12, 
82  and  128  of  the  Conditions  of  Employment  of  Other  Servants  of  the  European  Union, 
or  in  the  relevant  provisions  of  other  staff  rules  applicable  to  those  institutions,  bodies, 
offices  or  agencies,  shall  be  understood  as  not  including  the  United  Kingdom.  
                                                            
112  
Council  Decision  (CFSP)  2017/2315  of  11  December  2017  establishing  permanent  structured 
cooperation  (PESCO)  and  determining  the  list  of  participating  Member  States  (OJ  L  331,  14.12.2017,  p. 
57). 
76      
76     
Article  123 
Institutional  arrangements  
1.  Notwithstanding  Article  122,  during  the  transition  period  Article  6  shall  apply. 
2.  For  the  purposes  of  the  Treaties,  during  the  transition  period,  the  parliament  of  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  not  be  considered  to  be  a  national  parliament  of  a  Member  State,  except  as 
regards  Article  1  and,  in  respect  of  proposals  which  are  in  the  public  domain,  Article  2  of  Protocol 
(No  1)  on  the  role  of  national  parliaments  in  the  European  Union. 
3.  During  the  transition  period,  provisions  of  the  Treaties  which  grant  institutional  rights  to 
Member  States  enabling  them  to  submit  proposals,  initiatives  or  requests  to  the  institutions  shall 
be  understood  as  not  including  the  United  Kingdom 113 . 
4.  For  the  purposes  of  participation  in  the  institutional  arrangements  laid  down  in  Articles  282  and 
283  TFEU  and  in  Protocol  (No  4)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European  system  of  central  banks  and  of 
the  European  Central  Bank  with  the  exception  of  Article  21(2)  of  that  Protocol,  during  the 
transition  period,  the  Bank  of  England  shall  not  be  considered  to  be  a  national  central  bank  of  a 
Member  State. 
5.  By  way  of  derogation  from  paragraph  1  and  from  Article  6,  during  the  transition  period, 
representatives  or  experts  of  the  United  Kingdom,  or  experts  designated  by  the  United  Kingdom, 
may,  upon  invitation,  exceptionally  attend  meetings  or  parts  of  meetings  of  the  committees 
referred  to  in  Article  3(2)  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  182/2011,  of  Commission  expert  groups,  of  other 
similar  entities,  or  of  bodies,  offices  or  agencies  where  and  when  representatives  or  experts  of 
the  Member  States  or  experts  designated  by  Member  States  take  part,  provided  that  one  the 
following  conditions  is  fulfilled: 
(a)   the  discussion  concerns  individual  acts  to  be  addressed  during  the  transition  period  to 
the  United  Kingdom  or  to  natural  or  legal  persons  residing  or  established  in  the  United 
Kingdom; 
(b)    the  presence  of  the  United  Kingdom  is  necessary  and  in  the  interest  of  the  Union,  in 
particular  for  the  effective  implementation  of  Union  law  during  the  transition  period. 
During  such  meetings  or  parts  of  meetings,  the  representatives  or  experts  of  the  United  Kingdom 
or  experts  designated  by  it  shall  have  no  voting  rights  and  their  presence  shall  be  limited  to  the 
specific  agenda  items  that  fulfil  the  conditions  set  out  in  point  (a)  or  (b).  
6.  During  the  transition  period,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  not  act  as  leading  authority  for  risk 
assessments,  examinations,  approvals  and  authorisations  at  the  level  of  the  Union  or  of  Member 
States  acting  jointly  referred  to  in  the  [acts/provisions]  listed  in  Annex  [y+6]. * 
7.  During  the  transition  period,  where  draft  Union  acts  identify  or  refer  directly  to  specific  Member 
State  authorities,  procedures,  or  documents,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  consulted  by  the 
Union  on  such  drafts  with  a  view  to  ensuring  the  proper  implementation  and  application  of  that 
act  by  and  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
                                                            
113  
This  should  in  particular  concern  Articles  7,  30,  42(4),  48(2)  –  (6)  and  49  TEU  and  Articles  25,  76(b),  82(3),  83(3), 
86(1),  87(3),  135,  218(8),  223(1),  262,  311  and  341  TFEU.  
*  
Agreement  on  this  paragraph  is  conditional  on  the  provision  of  an  exhaustive  list  in  Annex  y+6, 
building  on  an  indicative  list  already  provided. 
77      
77     
Article  124 
Specific  arrangements  relating  to  the  Union's  external  action 
1. Without  prejudice  to  Article  122(2),  during  the  transition  period,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be 
bound  by  the  obligations  stemming  from  the  international  agreements  concluded  by  the  Union, 
or  by  Member  States  acting  on  its  behalf,  or  by  the  Union  and  its  Member  States  acting  jointly  as 
referred  to  in  Article  2(a)(iv). **  
2.  During  the  transition  period,  representatives  of  the  United  Kingdom  shall  not  participate  in  the 
work  of  any  bodies  set  up  by  international  agreements  concluded  by  the  Union,  or  by  Member 
States  acting  on  its  behalf,  or  by  the  Union  and  its  Member  States  acting  jointly,  unless: 
(a)   the  United  Kingdom  participates  in  its  own  right;  or  
(b)  the  Union  exceptionally  invites  the  United  Kingdom  to  attend  meetings  or  parts  of 
meetings  of  such  bodies,  as  part  of  its  delegation,  where  the  Union  considers  that  the 
presence  of  the  United  Kingdom  is  necessary  and  in  the  interest  of  the  Union,  in 
particular  for  the  effective  implementation  of  those  agreements  during  the  transition 
period.  Such  presence  shall  only  be  possible  where  Member  States  participation  is 
allowed  under  the  applicable  agreements. 
3.  In  accordance  with  the  principle  of  sincere  cooperation,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  refrain,  during 
the  transition  period,  from  any  action  or  initiative  which  is  likely  to  be  prejudicial  to  the  Union's 
interests,  in  particular  in  the  framework  of  any  international  organisation,  agency,  conference  or 
forum  of  which  the  United  Kingdom  is  a  party  in  its  own  right.  
4.  Notwithstanding  paragraph  3,  during  the  transition  period,  the  United  Kingdom  may  negotiate, 
sign  and  ratify  international  agreements  entered  into  in  its  own  capacity  in  the  areas  of  exclusive 
competence  of  the  Union,  provided  those  agreements  do  not  enter  into  force  or  apply  during  the 
transition  period,  unless  so  authorised  by  the  Union. 
5.  Without  prejudice  to  Article  122(2),  whenever  there  is  a  need  for  coordination,  the  United 
Kingdom  may  be  consulted,  on  a  case-­‐by-­‐case  basis. 
6.  Following  a  decision  of  the  Council  falling  under  Chapter  2  of  Title  V  TEU,  the  United  Kingdom 
may  make  a  formal  declaration  to  the  High  Representative  of  the  Union  for  Foreign  Affairs  and 
Security  Policy,  indicating  that,  for  vital  and  stated  reasons  of  national  policy,  in  those 
exceptional  cases  it  will  not  apply  the  decision.  In  a  spirit  of  mutual  solidarity,  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  refrain  from  any  action  likely  to  conflict  with  or  impede  Union  action  based  on  that 
decision  and  the  Member  States  shall  respect  its  position. 
7.  During  the  transition  period,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  not  provide  commanders  of  civilian 
operations,  heads  of  mission,  operation  commanders  or  force  commanders  for  missions  or 
operations  conducted  under  Articles  42,  43  and  44  TEU,  nor  shall  it  provide  the  operational 
headquarters  for  such  missions  or  operations  or  serve  as  framework  nation  for  Union 
battlegroups.  During  the  transition  period,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  not  provide  the  head  of  any 
operational  actions  under  Article  28  TEU.  
                                                            
**  
The  Union  will  notify  the  other  parties  to  these  agreements  that  during  the  transition  period,  the 
United  Kingdom  is  to  be  treated  as  a  Member  State  for  the  purposes  of  these  agreements. 
78      
78     
Article  125 
Specific  arrangements  relating  to  fishing  opportunities 
1.  As  regards  the  fixing  of  fishing  opportunities  within  the  meaning  of  Article  43(3)  TFEU  for  any 
period  falling  within  the  transition  period,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  consulted  in  respect  of 
the  fishing  opportunities  related  to  the  United  Kingdom,  including  in  the  context  of  the 
preparation  of  relevant  international  consultations  and  negotiations.  
2.  For  the  purpose  of  paragraph  1,  the  Union  shall  offer  the  opportunity  to  the  United  Kingdom  to 
provide  comments  on  the  Commission  Annual  Communication  on  fishing  opportunities,  the 
scientific  advice  from  the  relevant  scientific  bodies  and  the  Commission  proposals  for  fishing 
opportunities  for  any  period  falling  within  the  transition  period. 
3.  Notwithstanding  Article  124(2)(b),  with  a  view  to  allowing  the  United  Kingdom  to  prepare  its 
future  membership  in  relevant  international  fora,  the  Union  may  exceptionally  invite  the  United 
Kingdom  to  attend,  as  part  of  the  Union  delegation,  international  consultations  and  negotiations 
referred  to  in  paragraph  1  of  this  Article,  to  the  extent  allowed  for  Member  States  and  permitted 
by  the  specific  forum. 
4.  Without  prejudice  to  Article  122(1),  the  relative  stability  keys  for  the  allocation  of  fishing 
opportunities  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  of  this  Article  shall  be  maintained. 
Article  126 
Supervision  and  enforcement  
During  the  transition  period,  the  institutions,  bodies,  offices  and  agencies  of  the  Union  shall  have  the 
powers  conferred  upon  them  by  Union  law  in  relation  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  natural  and  legal 
persons  residing  or  established  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  particular,  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the 
European  Union  shall  have  jurisdiction  as  provided  for  in  the  Treaties. 
The  first  paragraph  shall  also  apply  during  the  transition  period  as  regards  the  interpretation  and 
application  of  this  Agreement.    
79      
79     
PART  FIVE 
FINANCIAL  PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER  1 
General  provisions 
Article  127 
Currency  to  be  used  between  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom 
Without  prejudice  to  the  applicable  Union  law  concerning  the  Union's  own  resources,  all  the 
amounts,  liabilities,  calculations,  accounts  and  payments  referred  to  in  this  Part  shall  be  drawn  up 
and  implemented  in  euro.  
Article  127a 
Facility  offered  to  auditors  in  relation  to  the  financial  provisions 
The  United  Kingdom  shall  inform  the  Union  about  the  entities  it  entrusted  in  order  to  audit  the 
implementation  of  the  financial  provisions  covered  by  this  part  of  this  Agreement.  
On  the  United  Kingdom's  request,  the  Union  shall  provide  to  these  entrusted  entities  information 
that  may  reasonably  be  requested  as  regards  the  United  Kingdom’s  rights  and  obligations  under  this 
Part  and  provide  them  adequate  assistance  to  allow  them  to  accomplish  their  task.   In  providing 
information  and  assistance  under  this  Article,  the  Union  shall  act  in  accordance  with  applicable  Union 
law,  in  particular  with  Union  rules  on  data  protection. 
The  auditors  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  auditors  of  the  Union  may  agree  on  appropriate 
administrative  arrangements  facilitating  the  audit  process.  
CHAPTER  2 
The  United  Kingdom's  contribution  to  and  participation  in  the  Union  budget 
Article  128 
The  United  Kingdom's  contribution  to  and  participation  in  the  implementation  of  the  Union  budgets 
for  the  years  2019  and  2020 
1.   For  the  years  2019  and  2020,  in  accordance  with  Part  Four,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  contribute 
to  and  participate  in  the  implementation  of  the  Union  budgets.  
2.  By  way  of  derogation  from  Part  Four,  amendments  to  Council  Regulation  (EU,  Euratom) 
1311/2013 114  or  Council  Decision  2014/335/EU,  Euratom  adopted  on  or  after  the  date  of  entry 
into  force  of  this  Agreement  shall  not  apply  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  so  far  as  those 
amendments  have  an  impact  on  the  United  Kingdom's  financial  obligations. 
                                                            
114  
Council  Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  1311/2013  of  2  December  2013  laying  down  the  multiannual 
financial  framework  for  the  years  2014-­‐2020  (OJ  L  347,  20.12.2013,  p.  884).  
80      
80     
Article  129 
Provisions  applicable  after  31  December  2020  in  relation  to  own  resources  
1.   The  applicable  Union  law  concerning  the  Union's  own  resources  relating  to  financial  years  until 
2020  shall  continue  to  apply  to  the  United  Kingdom  after  31  December  2020,  including  where  the 
own  resources  concerned  are  to  be  made  available,  corrected  or  subject  to  adjustments  after 
that  date. 
2.   Without  prejudice  to  Article  128(2),  the  Union  law  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  of  this  Article  shall 
include  in  particular  the  following  acts  and  provisions,  including  any  amendment  thereto, 
irrespective  of  the  date  of  adoption,  entry  into  force  or  application  of  the  amendment:  
(a) Decision  2014/335/EU,  Euratom; 
(b) Council  Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  609/2014,  including  Article  12  thereof  on  the  interest 
on  amounts  made  available  belatedly  and  Article  11  thereof  on  the  handling  of  the  opt-­‐
out;  
(c) Council  Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  608/2014  and  in  particular  Article  1  thereof  in 
relation  to  the  calculation  of  the  surplus  and  Articles  2  to  8  thereof  on  the  implementing 
measures  for  the  system  of  own  resources;  
(d) Council  Regulation  (EEC,  Euratom)  No  1553/89 115 ;  
(e) Council  Regulation  (EC,  Euratom)  No  1287/2003 116 ;  
(f) Commission  Implementing  Decision  (EU,  Euratom)  2016/2365 117 ;  
(g) Commission  Implementing  Decision  (EU,  Euratom)  2016/2366 118 ; 
(h) Regulation  (EU)  2018/xxx  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 119  (the  "Financial 
Regulation"); 
(i) Article  287  TFEU  on  the  role  of  the  Court  of  Auditors  as  well  as  other  rules  concerning  that 
institution;  
(j) Article  325  TFEU  on  combatting  fraud  and  related  acts,  in  particular  Regulation  (EU, 
Euratom)  No  883/2013  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 120  and  Council 
Regulation  (EC,  Euratom)  No  2988/95 121 ; 
                                                            
115  
Council  Regulation  (EEC,  Euratom)  No  1553/89  of  29  May  1989  on  the  definitive  uniform 
arrangements  for  the  collection  of  own  resources  accruing  from  value  added  tax  (OJ  L  155,  7.6.1989, 
p.  9). 
116  
Council  Regulation  (EC,  Euratom)  No  1287/2003  of  15  July  2003  on  the  harmonisation  of  gross 
national  income  at  market  prices  (GNI  Regulation)  (OJ  L  181,  19.7.2003,  p.  1). 
117  
Commission  Implementing  Decision  (EU,  Euratom)  2016/2365  of  19  December  2016  establishing 
forms  for  reporting  on  fraud  and  irregularities  affecting  entitlements  to  traditional  own  resources  and 
on  inspections  relating  to  traditional  own  resources  pursuant  to  Council  Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No 
608/2014  (OJ  L  350,  22.12.2016,  p.  24). 
118  
Commission  Implementing  Decision  (EU,  Euratom)  2016/2366  of  19  December  2016  establishing 
models  for  statements  of  accounts  for  entitlements  to  own  resources  and  a  form  for  reports  on 
irrecoverable  amounts  corresponding  to  the  entitlements  to  own  resources  pursuant  to  Council 
Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  609/2014  (OJ  L  350,  22.12.2016,  p.  30). 
119  
Regulation  (EU)  2018/xxx  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  [xxx]  on  the  financial  rules 
applicable  to  the  general  budget  of  the  Union  (OJ  L  […],  […],  p.  […]). 
81      
81     
(k) the  annual  budgets  for  the  financial  years  until  2020  or,  in  case  the  annual  budget  is  not 
adopted,  the  rules  applicable  in  accordance  with  Article  315  TFEU. 
3.   By  way  of  derogation  from  paragraphs  1  and  2,  the  following  rules  shall  apply  to  the  United 
Kingdom  after  31  December  2020:  
(a) any  amounts  resulting,  in  respect  of  the  United  Kingdom,  from  adjustments  to  own 
resources  entered  into  the  budget,  and  those  related  to  the  surplus  or  deficit,  in  relation 
to  the  financing  of  the  Union  budgets  until  2020  in  accordance  with  the  Union  law 
referred  to  in  paragraphs  1  and  2  shall  be  due  by  or  to  the  United  Kingdom.  The  share  of 
the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  calculated  in  accordance  with  Article  132;  
(b) if,  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  Union  law  concerning  the  Union's  own  resources, 
the  date  on  which  the  own  resources  are  to  be  made  available  is  after  28  February  2021, 
the  payment  shall  be  made  on  the  earliest  date  referred  to  in  Article  141(1)  following  the 
date  on  which  the  own  resources  are  to  be  made  available; 
(c) for  the  purpose  of  payment  by  the  United  Kingdom  of  traditional  own  resources  after  28 
February  2021,  the  amount  of  entitlements  established  in  accordance  with  Article  2 
Regulation  609/2014  after  the  reduction  of  the  collection  costs  in  accordance  with 
Articles  2(3)  and  10(3)  of  Decision  2014/335/EU,  Euratom  shall  be  reduced  by  the  United 
Kingdom's  share  of  this  amount;  
(d) by  way  of  derogation  from  Article  6  of  this  Agreement,  the  representatives  or  experts  of 
the  United  Kingdom,  or  experts  designated  by  the  United  Kingdom  may,  upon  invitation, 
exceptionally  attend,  without  voting  rights,  the  meetings  of  any  committee  established 
by  the  applicable  Union  law  referred  to  in  paragraphs  1  and  2  of  this  Article,  such  as  the 
meetings  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Own  Resources  established  by  Article  7  of 
Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  608/2014  or  the  GNI  Committee  established  by  Article  4  of 
Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  1287/2003,  to  the  extent  that  the  work  of  such  committees 
concerns  the  financial  years  until  2020;  
(e) any  correction  or  adjustments  to  the  own  resources  based  on  value  added  tax  and  gross 
national  income  shall  only  be  made  if  the  relevant  measures  pursuant  to  the  provisions 
referred  to  in  paragraphs  1  and  2  are  decided  no  later  than  31  December  2028;  
(f) the  separate  account  for  traditional  own  resources  referred  to  in  Article  6(2)  second 
subparagraph  of  Regulation  609/2014  shall  be  fully  liquidated  by  31  December  2025. 
Prior  to  20  February  2026,  a  share  of  the  amounts  still  in  that  account  and  not  being 
subject  to  European  Commission  inspection  findings  communicated  prior  to  that  date 
under  the  own  resources  legislation  shall  be  made  available  to  the  Union  budget 
corresponding  to  the  share  of  the  amounts  made  available  to  the  Union  on  the  amounts 
reported  to  the  European  Commission  in  the  framework  of  the  procedure  laid  down  in 
Article  13  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  609/2014  during  the  period  between  1  January  2014  and 
31  December  2020. 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
120  
Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  883/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  11 
September  2013  concerning  investigations  conducted  by  the  European  Anti-­‐Fraud  Office  (OLAF)  and 
repealing  Regulation  (EC)  No  1073/1999  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  and  Council 
Regulation  (Euratom)  No  1074/1999  (OJ  L  248,  18.9.2013,  p.  1). 
121  
Council  Regulation  (EC,  Euratom)  No  2988/95  of  18  December  1995  on  the  protection  of  the  European 
Communities  financial  interests  (OJ  L  312,  23.12.1995,  p.  1). 
82      
82     
Article  130 
The  United  Kingdom's  participation  in  the  implementation  of  the  Union  programmes  and  activities  in 
2019  and  2020 
1.  In  accordance  with  Part  Four,  the  Union  programmes  and  activities  committed  under  the 
multiannual  financial  framework  for  the  years  2014-­‐2020  ('MFF  2014-­‐2020')  or  previous  financial 
perspectives  shall  be  implemented  in  2019  and  2020  with  regard  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  the 
basis  of  the  applicable  Union  law.  
However,  Regulation  (EU)  No  1307/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 122  shall 
not  apply  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  claim  year  2020. 
2.  By  way  of  derogation  from  Part  Four,  the  United  Kingdom  and  projects  located  in  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  only  be  eligible  for  financial  operations  carried  out  within  financial  instruments 
managed  directly  or  indirectly  under  Title  X  of  the  Financial  Regulation  or  financial  operations 
guaranteed  by  the  Union  budget  under  the  European  Fund  for  Strategic  Investments  (EFSI) 
established  by  Regulation  (EU)  2015/1017  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  123  and 
the  European  Fund  for  Sustainable  Development  (EFSD)  established  by  Regulation  (EU) 
2017/1601  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 124 ,  provided  that  those  financial 
operations  were  approved  by  the  entities  and  bodies,  including  the  EIB  or  the  European 
Investment  Fund  ("EIF")  or  persons  entrusted  with  the  implementation  of  part  of  these  actions 
before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  even  if  the  signature  of  those  financial 
operations  took  place  after  that  date.  In  relation  to  those  financial  operations  approved  after  the 
date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  entities  established  in  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be 
treated  as  entities  located  outside  the  Union. 
Article  131 
Union  law  applicable  after  31  December  2020  in  relation  to  the  United  Kingdom's  participation  in  the 
implementation  of  the  Union  programmes  and  activities  committed  under  the  MFF  2014-­‐2020  or 
previous  financial  perspectives 
1.   In  respect  of  the  implementation  of  the  Union  programmes  and  activities  committed  under  the 
MFF  2014-­‐2020  or  previous  financial  perspectives,  applicable  Union  law,  including  the  rules  on 
financial  corrections  and  on  clearance  of  accounts,  shall  continue  to  apply  with  regard  to  the 
United  Kingdom  after  31  December  2020  until  the  closure  of  those  Union  programmes  and 
activities.  
                                                            
122  
Regulation  (EU)  No  1307/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  17  December  2013 
establishing  rules  for  direct  payments  to  farmers  under  support  schemes  within  the  framework  of  the 
common  agricultural  policy  and  repealing  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  637/2008  and  Council  Regulation 
(EC)  No  73/2009  (OJ  L  347,  20.12.2013,  p.  608). 
123  
Regulation  (EU)  2015/1017  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  25  June  2015  on  the 
European  Fund  for  Strategic  Investments,  the  European  Investment  Advisory  Hub  and  the  European 
Investment  Project  Portal  and  amending  Regulations  (EU)  No  1291/2013  and  (EU)  No  1316/2013  — 
the  European  Fund  for  Strategic  Investments  (OJ  L  169,  1.7.2015,  p.  1). 
124  
Regulation  (EU)  2017/1601  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  26  September  2017 
establishing  the  European  Fund  for  Sustainable  Development  (EFSD),  the  EFSD  Guarantee  and  the 
EFSD  Guarantee  Fund  (OJ  L  249,  27.9.2017,  p.  1). 
83      
83     
2.   The  Union  law  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  shall  include  in  particular  the  following  provisions, 
including  any  amendment  thereto,  irrespective  of  the  date  of  adoption,  entry  into  force  or 
application  of  the  amendment: 
(a)   the  Financial  Regulation; 
(b)  the  basic  acts,  within  the  meaning  of  point  (d)  of  Article  2  of  the  Financial  Regulation, 
establishing  Union  programmes  referred  to  in  the  budget  remarks  concerning  titles, 
chapters,  articles  or  items  on  which  the  appropriations  have  been  committed; 
(c)  Article  299  TFEU  on  the  enforceability  of  pecuniary  obligations; 
(d)  Article  287  TFEU  on  the  role  of  the  Court  of  Auditors  as  well  as  other  rules  concerning 
that  institution; 
(e)  Article  325  TFEU  on  combatting  fraud  and  related  acts,  in  particular  Regulation  (EU, 
Euratom)  No  883/2013  and  Regulation  (EC,  Euratom)  No  2988/95. 
3.   By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  6  of  this  Agreement,  the  representatives  or  experts  of  the 
United  Kingdom,  or  experts  designated  by  the  United  Kingdom,  may,  upon  invitation, 
exceptionally  attend,  without  voting  rights,  meetings  of  the  committees  that  assist  the  European 
Commission  in  the  implementation  and  the  management  of  the  programmes  established  by 
Union  law  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  or  established  by  the  European  Commission  in  respect  of 
the  implementation  of  that  law,  to  the  extent  that  their  work  concerns  the  financial  years  until 
2020.  
4.  By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  7  of  this  Agreement,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  have  access,  to 
the  extent  strictly  necessary  for  the  implementation  of  the  programmes  and  activities  referred  to 
in  paragraph  2(b),  to  the  network,  information  system  and  the  databases  established  under  the 
respective  basic  acts  or  by  the  related  implementation  rules  derived  from  these  basic  acts. 
5.  On  a  proposal  of  the  Committee  on  the  financial  provisions  referred  to  in  Article  158,  the  Joint 
Committee  referred  to  in  Article  157  may  adopt,  in  conformity  with  the  rules  established  in 
Article  159,  technical  measures  to  facilitate  the  closure  of  the  programmes  referred  to  in 
paragraph  1  or  to  exempt  the  United  Kingdom  from  obligations  to  take  actions  during  or  after 
the  closure  of  these  programmes  which  are  not  relevant  for  a  departing  Member  State  provided 
that  these  technical  measures  respect  the  principle  of  sound  financial  management  and  do  not 
result  in  an  advantage  in  favour  of  the  United  Kingdom  or  the  United  Kingdom  beneficiaries 
compared  to  Member  States  or  Third  Countries  participating  in  the  same  programmes  financed 
by  the  Union  budget. 
Article  132 
Share  of  the  United  Kingdom  
The  United  Kingdom's  share  referred  to  in  the  second  sentence  of  points  (a)  and  (c)  of  Article  129(3), 
and  in  Articles  133  to  140  shall  be  a  percentage  calculated  as  the  ratio  between  the  own  resources 
made  available  by  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  years  2014  to  2020  and  the  own  resources  made 
available  by  all  Member  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  during  that  period  as  adjusted  by  the 
amount  communicated  to  the  Member  States  before  1  February  2022  in  accordance  with  Article 
10b(5)  of  Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No  609/2014.  
84      
84     
Article  133 
Outstanding  commitments  
1.  Unless  otherwise  provided  for  in  this  Agreement,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  liable  to  the  Union 
for  its  share  of  the  budgetary  commitments  of  the  Union  budget  and  of  the  budgets  of  the  Union 
decentralised  agencies  outstanding  on  31  December  2020  and  the  commitments  made  in  2021 
on  the  carryover  of  commitment  appropriations  from  the  budgets  for  2020.  
The  first  subparagraph  shall  not  apply  to  the  following  commitments  outstanding  on  31 
December  2020:  
(a)   those  related  to  the  programmes  and  bodies  to  which  Article  11  of  Regulation  (EU, 
Euratom)  No  609/2014  applies  with  regard  to  the  United  Kingdom;  
(b)  those  financed  by  assigned  revenue  in  the  Union  budget.  
With  regard  to  the  Union's  decentralised  agencies,  the  amount  of  their  commitments  referred  to 
in  the  first  subparagraph  shall  only  be  taken  into  account  in  proportion  to  the  share  of 
contributions  from  the  Union  budget  in  their  overall  revenues  for  the  period  2014-­‐2020.  
2.  The  Union  shall  calculate  the  amount  of  commitments  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  on  31 
December  2020.  It  shall  communicate  that  amount  to  the  United  Kingdom  by  31  March  2021, 
adding  a  list  with  the  reference  of  each  commitment,  the  budget  lines  associated,  and  the 
amount  for  each  associated  budget  line.  
3.  The  Union  shall,  by  31  March  of  each  year,  starting  in  2022,  with  regard  to  the  commitments 
referred  to  in  paragraph  1,  communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom:  
(a)   information  on  the  amount  of  commitments  outstanding  on  31  December  of  the 
previous  year  and  on  the  payments  and  the  decommitments  made  in  the  previous  year, 
including  an  update  of  the  list  referred  to  in  paragraph  2;  and 
(b)    an  estimate  of  the  expected  payments  in  the  current  year  based  on  the  level  of  payment 
appropriations  in  the  budget  and  the  expected  contribution  of  the  United  Kingdom  to 
those  payments; 
(c)  other  information  such  as  a  medium  term  payment  forecast. 
4.  The  annual  amount  payable  shall  be  calculated  as  the  United  Kingdom's  share  of  the  estimate 
referred  to  in  point  (b)  of  paragraph  3  adjusted  by  the  difference  between  the  payments  made 
by  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  previous  year  and  the  United  Kingdom's  share  of  the  payments 
made  by  the  Union  in  the  previous  year  on  the  outstanding  commitments  referred  to  in 
paragraph  1,  reduced  by  the  amount  of  net  financial  corrections  in  relation  to  programmes  and 
activities  financed  under  the  MFF  2014-­‐2020  or  previous  financial  perspectives  and  by  the 
proceeds  of  infringement  procedures  concerning  the  failure  of  a  Member  State  to  make  available 
own  resources  related  to  financial  years  until  2020,  only  if  these  amounts  have  been  received  by 
the  budget  in  the  previous  year  and  are  definitive.  The  annual  amount  payable  by  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  not  be  adjusted  in  the  given  year. 
In  2021,  the  annual  amount  payable  by  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  reduced  by  the  share  of  the 
United  Kingdom  in  the  financing  of  the  budget  for  2020  of  the  amount  of  payment 
appropriations  carried  over  from  2020  to  2021  in  accordance  with  Article  13  of  the  Financial 
Regulation  and  by  the  share  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  total  amount  of  traditional  own 
85      
85     
resources  made  available  to  the  Union  in  January  and  February  2021  in  respect  of  which  the 
Union’s  entitlements  were  established  in  accordance  with  Article  2  of  Regulation  609/2014  in 
November  and  December  2020.  The  Union  shall  also  reimburse  to  the  United  Kingdom  the  share 
of  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  total  amount  of  traditional  own  resources  made  available  by  the 
Member  States  after  31  December  2020  for  goods  released  for  free  circulation  in  respect  of 
ending  or  discharge  of  temporary  storage  or  customs  procedures  started  before  this  date.  
5.  On  a  request  of  the  United  Kingdom,  made  at  the  earliest  after  31  December  2028,  the  Union 
shall  make  an  estimate  of  the  remaining  amounts  to  be  paid  by  the  United  Kingdom  under  this 
article,  on  the  basis  of  a  rule  taking  into  account  the  amount  of  outstanding  commitments  at  the 
end  of  the  year  and  an  estimate  of  decommitments  on  these  outstanding  commitments,  of 
financial  corrections  and  of  proceeds  of  the  respective  infringement  procedures  after  the  end  of 
the  year.  After  the  confirmation  by  the  United  Kingdom  of  the  acceptance  of  the  proposal  to  the 
Committee  on  the  financial  provisions  referred  to  in  Article  158  and  the  Joint  Committee  referred 
to  in  Article  157,  on  30  June  of  the  following  year  and  following  the  procedure  in  Article  141,  the 
United  Kingdom  shall  pay  this  amount  adjusted  as  described  in  paragraph  4  in  relation  to  the 
payments  made  by  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  previous  year.  The  payment  of  the  amounts 
referred  to  in  this  subparagraph  shall  extinguish  the  remaining  obligations  from  the  United 
Kingdom  or  the  Union  under  this  Article. 
Article  134 
Fines  decided  before  31  December  2020 
In  respect  of  a  fine  decided  by  the  Union  before  31  December  2020  that  becomes  definitive  and 
which  does  not  constitute  assigned  revenue,  the  Union  shall  reimburse  to  the  United  Kingdom  its 
share  of  the  amount  of  the  fine  collected  by  the  Union  unless  it  has  already  been  recorded  as  budget 
revenue  in  the  Union  budget  before  31  December  2020.  
Article  135 
Union  liabilities  at  the  end  of  2020 
1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  be  liable  to  the  Union  for  its  share  of  the  financing  of  the  Union's 
liabilities  incurred  until  31  December  2020,  with  the  exception  of  the  following:  
(a)   liabilities  with  corresponding  assets,  including:  Union  financial  assistance  loan  assets  and 
the  associated  balance  sheet  liabilities,  assets  corresponding  to  property,  plant  and 
equipment  and  provisions  related  to  the  Joint  Research  Centre's  nuclear  sites 
dismantlement,  and  all  lease-­‐related  obligations,  intangible  assets  and  inventories,  any 
assets  and  liabilities  relating  to  the  management  of  foreign  currency  risk,  accrued  and 
deferred  income  and  all  provisions  other  than  in  respect  of  fines,  legal  proceedings  and 
financial  guarantee  liabilities;  
(b)    liabilities  and  assets  which  are  related  to  the  operation  of  the  budget  and  the 
management  of  own  resources,  including  outstanding  pre-­‐financing  advances, 
receivables,  cash,  payables,  and  accrued  charges,  including  those  related  to  the 
European  Agricultural  Guarantee  Fund  (EAGF)  or  already  included  in  the  outstanding 
commitments  (RAL). 
86      
86     
2.  In  particular,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  liable  for  its  share  of  the  Union  liability  for  the  pension 
and  other  employee  benefits  rights  accrued  on  or  before  31  December  2020.  Payments  related 
to  this  liability  shall  be  made  in  accordance  with  paragraph  5. 
3.  The  Union  shall  communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom  by  31  March  of  each  year,  starting  in  2022, 
the  payments  made  during  the  previous  year  corresponding  to  liabilities  outstanding  at  31 
December  2020  and  the  amount  of  the  contribution  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  those  payments. 
4.   By  31  March  of  each  year,  starting  in  2022,  the  Union  shall  communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom 
a  specific  document  on  pensions  related  to  the  situation  at  31  December  of  the  preceding  year 
for  the  liability  referred  to  in  paragraph  2,  which  shall  provide: 
(a) the  remaining  amounts  still  to  be  paid  in  relation  to  the  liabilities  described  in 
subparagraph  5(a); 
(b) the  calculations  made  and  the  data  and  assumptions  used  to  determine  the  amount  that 
the  United  Kingdom  must  pay,  by  30  June  of  the  current  year,   in  relation  to  staff  pension 
payments  and  the  Union  budget  contributions  to  the  Joint  Sickness  Insurance  Scheme 
(JSIS)  made  in  the  preceding  year  in  accordance  with  subparagraph  5(b)  and  an  estimate 
of  these  amounts  for  the  current  year;  
(c) concerning  the  population  at  31  December  2020,  information  on  the  number  of 
beneficiaries  and  estimated  future  beneficiaries  of  the  staff  pension  and  sickness 
insurance  schemes  at  the  end  of  the  previous  year  and  their  accumulated  post-­‐
employment  rights  at  that  time;  and 
(d) the  outstanding  United  Kingdom  liabilities  calculated  using  actuarial  valuations  made  in 
accordance  with  the  relevant  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  and  an 
explanation  of  the  evolution  of  this  liability  compared  to  the  previous  year. 
That  document  may  be  updated  by  30  September  of  the  same  year  to  reflect  the  definitive 
figures  of  the  year. 
5.  The  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  pension  and  other  employee  benefits  referred  to  in 
paragraph  2  shall  be  established  as  follows: 
(a)   for  the  pensions  of  the  Members  and  EU  high-­‐level  public  office  holders  covered  by 
Regulation  422/67/EEC,  5/67/Euratom 125 ,  Decision  2005/684/EC,Euratom 126  and 
Regulation  2016/300 127 ,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  contribute  to  the  liabilities  as  they  are 
recorded  in  the  consolidated  accounts  of  the  Union  for  the  financial  year  2020  in  10 
instalments  paid  in  accordance  with  Article  141  of  this  Agreement  on  31  October  of  each 
year,  starting  on  31  October  2021; 
                                                            
125  
Regulation  No  422/67/EEC,  5/67/Euratom  of  the  Council  of  25  July  1967  determining  the  emoluments 
of  the  President  and  members  of  the  Commission  and  of  the  President,  Judges,  Advocates-­‐General 
and  Registrar  of  the  Court  of  Justice  (OJ  187,  8.8.1967,  p.  1) 
126  
Decision  2005/684/EC,  Euratom  of  the  European  Parliament  of  28  September  2005  adopting  the 
Statute  for  Members  of  the  European  Parliament  (OJ  L  262,  7.10.2005,  p.  1)  
127  
Council  Regulation  (EU)  2016/300  of  29  February  2016  determining  the  emoluments  of  EU  high-­‐level 
public  office  holders  (OJ  L  58,  4.3.2016,  p.  1). 
87      
87     
(b)  for  the  pensions  established  in  accordance  with  the  Staff  Regulations,  in  accordance  with 
Articles  77  to  84  of  Regulation  No  31  (EEC),  11  (EAEC), 128  and  in  accordance  with  Articles 
33  to  39  of  the  Conditions  of  Employment  of  Other  servants  of  the  European  Union,  the 
United  Kingdom  shall  contribute  annually  to  the  net  payments  made  from  the  Union 
budget  to  each  beneficiary  and  to  the  related  contribution  of  the  Union  budget  to  the 
Joint  Sickness  Insurance  Scheme  (JSIS)  for  this  beneficiary  or  person  benefitting  through 
this  beneficiary.  The  payment  shall  be  made  in  accordance  with  Article  141  of  this 
Agreement  on  30  June  of  each  year,  starting  on  30  June  2022.  
The  payment  of  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  the  sum  of  the  net  payments  made  by  the 
Union  budget  in  the  preceding  year  for  each  beneficiary,  multiplied  by  the  United 
Kingdom's  share  as  calculated  in  Article  132  of  this  Agreement  and  by  a  percentage 
specific  to  each  beneficiary.  
For  a  beneficiary  receiving  pension  on  1  January  2021,  the  specific  percentage  shall  be 
100%. 
For  any  other  beneficiary  of  a  pension,  the  specific  percentage  shall  be  calculated  as  the 
ratio  between  the  acquired  pension  rights  as  defined  in  the  Staff  Regulations  and  in 
particular  in  its  Annex  VIII  on  31  December  2020  including  pension  rights  transferred  in 
at  that  date,  and  the  acquired  pension  rights  at  the  date  of  retirement  or  death  if  earlier, 
or  at  the  date  the  person  leaves  the  scheme.  
For  the  purposes  of  the  contribution  of  the  budget  to  the  JSIS,  the  specific  percentage 
shall  be  calculated  as  the  ratio  between  the  number  of  years  during  which  the 
beneficiary  contributed  to  the  pension  scheme  before  31  December  2020  and  the  total 
number  of  years  at  retirement  during  which  the  beneficiary  or  the  person  covered  by  the 
Staff  Regulations  which  is  the  origin  of  the  rights  under  the  JSIS  contributed  to  the 
pension  scheme. 
For  a  beneficiary  of  a  surviving  or  an  orphan  pension  defined  in  the  Staff  Regulation,  the 
calculation  shall  be  made  on  the  basis  of  the  career  of  the  person  covered  by  the  Staff 
Regulation  which  is  the  origin  of  the  surviving  or  the  orphan  pension. 
As  long  as  the  liability  in  relation  to  this  subparagraph  is  not  extinguished,  the  United 
Kingdom  may  send,  before  1  March  of  year  N,  the  Union  a  request  to  pay  the  remaining 
liability  at  31  December  of  year  N.  The  Union  shall  establish  the  remaining  liability  in 
relation  to  the  staff  pension  and  JSIS  post-­‐employment  benefits  using  the  same 
methodology  as  used  in  paragraph  4(d).  This  amount  shall  be  paid  by  the  United 
Kingdom  in  5  instalments  in  accordance  with  Article  141  of  this  Agreement  on  31 
October  of  each  year  starting  in  year  N+1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  also  cover  its  liability 
for  the  year  N  through  the  procedure  established  in  subparagraph  5(b).  After  this 
payment  and  provided  that  the  payments  referred  to  in  subparagraph  5(a)  have  been 
completed,  the  remaining  obligations  under  this  Article  shall  be  extinguished.  The 
Committee  on  the  financial  provisions  referred  to  in  Article  158  and  the  Joint  Committee 
referred  to  in  Article  157  shall  be  informed  of  this  situation. 
                                                            
128  
EEC/EAEC  Council:  Regulation  No  31  (EEC),  11  (EAEC),  laying  down  the  Staff  Regulations  of  Officials 
and  the  Conditions  of  Employment  of  Other  Servants  of  the  European  Economic  Community  and  the 
European  Atomic  Energy  Community  (OJ  45,  14.6.1962,  p.  1385) 
88      
88     
Article  136 
Contingent  financial  liabilities  related  to  loans  for  financial  assistance,  EFSI,  EFSD  and  the  external 
lending  mandate.  
1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  be  liable  to  the  Union  for  its  share  of  the  contingent  financial  liabilities 
of  the  Union  arising  from  financial  operations: 
(a)   decided  by  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council,  by  the  European  Commission  
before  the  date  of  entry  in  force  of  this  Agreement  related  to  loans  for  financial 
assistance  decided  in  accordance  with  Council  Regulation(EU)  No  407/2010 129 ,  Council 
Regulation  (EC)  No  332/2002 130 ,  the  decisions  of  the  European  Parliament  and  the 
Council  providing  macro-­‐financial  assistance  to  various  countries  on  the  basis  of  a 
provisioning  in  accordance  with  Council  Regulation  (EC,  Euratom)No  480/2009 131 ;  
(b)  approved  by  the  bodies,  entities  or  persons  directly  entrusted  with  the  implementation 
before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  in  relation  to  budgetary  guarantees 
given  in  favour  of  the  EIB  through  the  EFSI,  in  accordance  with  Regulation  (EU) 
2015/1017,  and  the  external  lending  mandate  in  accordance  with  Regulation  (EC, 
Euratom)  No  480/2009  and  Decision  No  466/2014/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and 
the  Council 132 ,  or  in  favour  of  eligible  counterparts  (EFSD). 
On  31  July  2019,  the  Union  shall  provide  to  the  United  Kingdom  a  specific  report  concerning 
those  financial  operations  providing  information  for  each  type  of  instrument  on: 
(i)  the  financial  liabilities  arising  from  those  financial  operations  on  the  date  of 
entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement; 
(ii)   where  applicable,  the  provisions  held  on  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this 
Agreement  in  the  respective  guarantee  funds  or  fiduciary  accounts  to  cover  the 
financial  liabilities  referred  to  in  point  (i)  and  the  respective  provisions 
committed  and  not  yet  paid. 
In  the  consolidated  accounts  of  the  Union  relating  to  the  years  2019  and  2020,  the  payments 
made  out  of  the  provisions  referred  to  in  point  (ii)  of  the  second  subparagraph  from  the  date  of 
entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  until  31  December  2019  and  2020  shall  be  disclosed, 
respectively,  for  the  same  financial  operations  as  referred  to  in  this  paragraph  but  which  are 
decided  on  or  after  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement.  
The  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  Union  in  relation  to  the  financial  operations  of  this 
paragraph  shall  not  be  affected  by  a  restructuring  of  these  financial  operations.  In  particular  its 
financial  exposure  shall  not  increase,  in  nominal  terms,  in  comparison  with  the  situation 
immediately  prior  to  the  restructuring. 
                                                            
129  
Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  407/2010  of  11  May  2010  establishing  a  European  financial  stabilisation 
mechanism  (OJ  L  118,  12.5.2010,  p.  1). 
130  
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  332/2002  of  18  February  2002  establishing  a  facility  providing  medium-­‐
term  financial  assistance  for  Member  States'  balances  of  payments  (OJ  L  53,  23.2.2002,  p.  1). 
131  
Council  Regulation  (EC,  Euratom)  No  480/2009  of  25  May  2009  establishing  a  Guarantee  Fund  for 
external  actions  (OJ  L  145,  10.6.2009,  p.  10). 
132  
Decision  No  466/2014/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council  of  16  April  2014  granting  an  EU 
guarantee  to  the  European  Investment  Bank  against  losses  under  financing  operations  supporting 
investment  projects  outside  the  Union  (OJ  L  135,  8.5.2014,  p.  1). 
89      
89     
2.  For  the  financial  operations  referred  to  in  paragraph  1,  the  Union  shall  be  liable  to  the  United 
Kingdom  for  its  share  of:  
(a) any  amount  recovered  by  the  Union  from  defaulting  debtors  or  related  to  undue 
payments;  and  
(b) any  net  revenue,  consisting  of  the  difference  between  financial  and  operational  revenues 
and  financial  and  operational  expenses,  entered  as  revenue,  general  or  assigned,  in  the 
Union  budget. 
For  revenue  of  the  asset  management  of  the  provisioning  of  instruments  having  a  provisioning, 
the  Union  shall  calculate  a  percentage  of  revenue  as  the  ratio  between  the  net  revenue  of  the 
asset  management  of  the  previous  year  and  the  total  provisioning  existing  at  the  end  of  the 
previous  year.  The  liability  toward  the  United  Kingdom  for  revenue  of  the  asset  management  of 
the  provisioning  shall  be  the  amount  obtained  by  multiplying  the  United  Kingdom's  current 
provisioning  as  referred  to  in  paragraph  5  by  the  percentage  of  revenue. 
3.  By  31  March  2021,  for  each  instrument  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  that  provides  for  provisioning 
from  the  Union's  budget  the  Union  shall  communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom: 
(a) its  initial  provisioning,  calculated  as  the  United  Kingdom's  share  of  the  sum  of:  
(i)  the  provisions  made  in  the  corresponding  guarantee  fund  by  31  December  2020; 
(ii)   the  amount  of  provisions  committed  and  not  yet  paid  by  31  December  2020;  and  
(iii)  the  payments  made  from  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  until  31 
December  2020  related  to  financial  operations  decided  on  or  after  the  date  of 
entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement; 
(b) its  default  provisioning  rate,  calculated  as  the  ratio  between  the  United  Kingdom's  initial 
provisioning  for  this  instrument  and  the  amount  of  financial  operations  referred  to  in 
paragraph  1  as  of  31  December  2020  decided  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this 
Agreement. 
4.  On  31  March  of  each  year,  starting  in  2021,  and  until  their  amortisation,  expiry  or  termination, 
the  Union  shall  communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom  information  concerning  the  financial 
operations  referred  to  in  paragraph  1.  The  information  shall  contain  for  each  type  of  instrument: 
(a) the  contingent  liabilities  outstanding  at  31  December  of  the  preceding  year; 
(b) the  payments  made  in  the  preceding  year  from  the  Union  related  to  those  financial 
operations  and  the  accumulated  amounts  since  31  December  2020; 
(c) the  United  Kingdom's  current  provisioning  and  current  provisioning  rate  as  set  out  in 
paragraph  5; 
(d) the  reimbursements  made  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  preceding  year  in  accordance 
with  point  (a)  of  paragraph  6  and  the  accumulated  amounts  since  31  December  2020; 
(e) the  amounts  recovered  and  the  net  revenues  entered  in  the  Union  budget  as  referred  to 
in  paragraph  2  for  the  preceding  year;  
(f) if  necessary,  other  useful  information  concerning  the  financial  operations  in  the 
preceding  year. 
90      
90     
5.  By  31  March  of  each  year,  for  each  instrument  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  where  the  basic  act 
establishes  provisioning  from  the  Union  budget,  the  Union  shall:  
(a) calculate  the  United  Kingdom's  current  provisioning  defined  as  the  United  Kingdom's 
initial  provisioning  reduced  by:  
(i)  the  United  Kingdom's  share  of  the  accumulated  payments  referred  to  in  point  (b) 
of  paragraph  4  made  from  the  Union  budget  since  31  December  2020  related  to 
financial  operations  decided  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this 
Agreement;  
(ii)   the  United  Kingdom's  share  of  the  amount  of  decommitments  made  in  the 
previous  years  on  the  outstanding  commitments  referred  to  in  point  (a)(ii)  of 
paragraph  3  of  this  Article,  as  communicated  pursuant  to  Article  133(3); 
(iii)  the  accumulated  level  of  reimbursements  made  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  of  31 
December  2020,  as  referred  to  in  point  (d)  of  paragraph  4; 
(b) communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom  the  current  provisioning  rate  defined  as  the  ratio 
between  the  United  Kingdom's  current  provisioning  and  the  amount  of  financial 
operations  referred  to  in  point  (a)  of  paragraph  4. 
6.  Every  year  from  2022  onwards: 
(a) if  the  United  Kingdom's  current  provisioning  rate  for  an  instrument  exceeds  its  default 
provisioning  rate  of  the  instrument,  the  Union  shall  be  liable  to  the  United  Kingdom  for 
that  instrument  for  the  amount  obtained  by  multiplying  the  amount  of  financial  liabilities 
referred  to  in  point  (a)  of  paragraph  4  by  the  difference  between  the  current  provisioning 
rate  and  the  default  provisioning  rate.  The  Union's  liability  shall  not  exceed  the  United 
Kingdom's  current  provisioning  as  calculated  in  paragraph  5; 
(b) if  the  United  Kingdom's  current  provisioning  rate  for  an  instrument  becomes  negative, 
the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  liable  to  the  Union  for  that  instrument  for  the  amount  of 
the  negative  current  provisioning.  In  the  following  years,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be 
liable  to  the  Union  for  that  instrument  for  its  share  of  the  payments  made  as  provided 
for  in  accordance  with  point  (b)  of  paragraph  4  of  this  Article  and  the  United  Kingdom's 
share  of  the  amount  of  decommitments  made  in  the  previous  year  on  the  outstanding 
commitments  referred  to  in  point  (a)(ii)  of  paragraph  3  of  this  Article,  as  communicated 
pursuant  to  Article  133(3). 
7.  If  the  United  Kingdom's  current  provisioning  is  positive  once  the  Union's  financial  operations 
related  to  an  instrument  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  are  extinguished,  the  Union  shall  be  liable  to 
the  United  Kingdom  for  the  amount  of  the  United  Kingdom's  current  provisioning  as  calculated  in 
paragraph  5. 
8.  After  31  December  2020,  if  payments  are  made  from  the  Union  budget  for  the  financial 
operations  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  related  to  an  instrument  for  which  the  basic  act  does  not 
establish  provisioning,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  liable  to  the  Union  for  that  instrument  for  its 
share  of  the  payments  made  as  provided  for  in  point  (b)  of  paragraph  4. 
9.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Article,  where  financial  liabilities,  payments,  recoveries  or  other  amounts 
relate  to  financial  operations  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  but  cannot  be  directly  determined  to 
arise  from  a  particular  financial  operation  as  a  result  of  the  application  of  risk  mutualisation  or 
subordination  mechanisms,  the  relevant  financial  liabilities,  payments,  recoveries  or  other 
91      
91     
amounts  required  to  be  determined  for  the  application  of  this  Article  shall  be  calculated  on  a 
pro-­‐rata  basis  between  the  amount  of  financial  operations  decided  or  approved  before  the  date 
of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  on  31  December  of  the  year  before  the  calculation  is  made 
and  the  total  amount  of  financial  operations  on  the  latter  date. 
10.  Non-­‐amortising  financial  operations  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  will  be  considered  after  10  years 
as  amortising  in  proportion  to  the  amortisation  of  the  remaining  amortising  operations.  
Article  137 
Financial  instruments  under  direct  or  indirect  implementation  financed  by  the  programmes  of  the 
MFF  2014-­‐2020  or  under  earlier  financial  perspectives  
1.  From  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  the  Union  shall  identify  (i)  the  financial 
operations  that  have  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  been  decided  by  the 
European  Commission  and  where  necessary  approved  by  the  financial  institutions  which  have 
been  entrusted  by  the  European  Commission  with  the  implementation  of  a  financial  instrument 
under  a  programme  of  the  MFF  2014-­‐2020  or  under  earlier  financial  perspectives  under  direct  or 
indirect  implementation  and  (ii)  the  financial  operations  that  have  been  decided  and  where 
necessary  approved  on  or  after  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  until  the  full 
amortisation  of  the  financial  operations  decided  by  those  financial  institutions  before  the  date  of 
entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement. 
On  31  July  2019,  in  the  report  referred  to  in  the  second  subparagraph  of  Article  136(1),  the  Union 
shall  provide  the  following  information  concerning  the  financial  instruments  under  direct  or 
indirect  implementation  financed  by  the  programmes  of  the  MFF  2014-­‐2020  or  under  earlier 
financial  perspectives: 
(a)   the  financial  liabilities  arising  from  the  operations  decided  by  the  European  Commission, 
or  by  the  entity  entrusted  by  the  European  Commission  with  the  implementation  of  the 
financial  instrument,  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement; 
(b)  the  payments  made  by  the  European  Commission  for  the  financial  instrument  and  the 
amount  committed  for  the  financial  instrument  and  not  yet  paid  at  that  date. 
The  liability  of  the  Union  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  relation  to  the  financial  operations  of  this 
paragraph  shall  not  be  affected  by  a  restructuring  of  these  financial  operations,  to  the  extent 
that  such  restructuring  does  not  increase  the  financial  exposure  to  the  counterparty,  in  nominal 
terms,  as  it  stood  immediately  prior  to  the  restructuring. 
2.  On  31  March  of  each  year,  starting  in  2021,  and  until  their  amortisation,  expiry  or  termination, 
for  each  financial  instrument  referred  to  in  paragraph  1,  the  Union  shall  communicate  to  the 
United  Kingdom  the  information  available  on  the  financial  operations  referred  to  in  paragraph  1 
that  have  been  decided  or  approved  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  and 
those  that  have  been  decided  or  approved  on  or  after  that  date.  For  each  instrument,  the 
information  shall  contain: 
(a) the  financial  liabilities  as  of  31  December  of  the  preceding  year  arising  from  the  financial 
operations  decided  by  the  European  Commission,  or  approved  by  the  entity  entrusted  by 
the  European  Commission  with  the  implementation  of  the  financial  instrument,  before 
the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement; 
92      
92     
(b) the  total  financial  liabilities  as  of  31  December  of  the  preceding  year  arising  from  the 
financial  operations  decided  by  the  European  Commission,  or  by  the  entity  entrusted  by 
the  European  Commission  with  the  implementation  of  the  instrument; 
(c) the  ratio  between  the  amounts  referred  to  in  points  (a)  and  (b); 
(d) the  payments  made  from  the  provisioning  fund  or  from  fiduciary  accounts  with  the 
entrusted  entities  related  to  financial  operations  that  have  been  decided  by  the 
European  Commission,  or  approved  by  the  entity  entrusted  by  the  European  Commission 
with  the  implementation  of  the  financial  instrument,  after  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of 
this  Agreement; 
(e) the  part  of  the  amounts  paid  back  to  the  Union  in  accordance  with  Article  202(2)  of  the 
Financial  Regulation,  other  than  the  returns  provided  for  in  point  (f)  of  this  paragraph, 
related  to  financial  operations  decided  or  approved  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of 
this  Agreement; 
(f) returns  on  resources  of  the  financial  instrument  in  the  provisioning  fund  or  in  fiduciary 
accounts  invested; 
(g) the  part  of  the  amount  of  the  provisioning  fund  or  the  fiduciary  accounts  which  has  not 
been  disbursed  and  has  been  recovered  by  the  European  Commission; 
(h) if  necessary,  other  useful  information  concerning  the  financial  operations  in  the 
preceding  year. 
3.  The  Union  shall  be  liable  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  United  Kingdom's  share  of  any  amount 
referred  in  points  (d)  to  (g)  of  paragraph  2. 
4.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Article,  where  financial  liabilities,  payments,  recoveries  or  other  amounts 
relate  to  financial  operations  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  but  cannot  be  directly  determined  to 
arise  from  a  particular  financial  operation  as  a  result  of  the  application  of  risk  mutualisation  or 
subordination  mechanisms,  the  relevant  financial  liabilities,  payments,  recoveries  or  other 
amounts  required  to  be  determined  for  the  application  of  this  Article  shall  be  calculated  on  a 
pro-­‐rata  basis  based  on  the  ratio  referred  to  in  point  (c)  of  paragraph  2  on  31  December  of  the 
year  before  the  calculation  is  made. 
Article  138 
The  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community  
The  Union  shall  be  liable  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  its  share  of  the  net  assets  of  the  European  Coal 
and  Steel  Community  in  liquidation  on  31  December  2020.  
The  relevant  amount  shall  be  reimbursed  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  5  equal  annual  instalments  on  30 
June  of  each  year  starting  on  30  June  2021  in  accordance  with  Article  141.  
Article  139 
Union  investment  in  the  EIF  
The  Union  shall  be  liable  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  its  share  of  the  Union's  investment  in  the  paid-­‐in 
capital  of  the  EIF  on  31  December  2020.  
93      
93     
The  relevant  amount  shall  be  reimbursed  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  5  equal  annual  instalments  on  30 
June  of  each  year  starting  on  30  June  2021  in  accordance  with  Article  141. 
Article  140 
Contingent  liabilities  related  to  legal  cases 
1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  be  liable  for  its  share  of  the  payments  required  to  discharge  the 
contingent  liabilities  of  the  Union  that  become  due  related  to  legal  cases  concerning  financial 
interests  of  the  Union  related  to  the  budget  and  in  particular  in  relation  to  Regulation  (EC, 
Euratom)  No  2988/95  or  resulting  from  the  execution  of  Union  programmes  and  policies, 
provided  that  the  facts  forming  the  subject  matter  of  those  cases  occurred  no  later  than  31 
December  2020.  
The  Union  shall  be  liable  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  its  share  of  any  amount  of  subsequent 
recoveries  related  to  the  payments  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph.  
2.  The  Union  shall  communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom  the  amounts  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  by 
31  March  of  each  year.  
Article  141 
Payments  after  2020 
1.   The  reference  dates  for  payments  by  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  Union  or  by  the  Union  to  the 
United  Kingdom  made  after  31  December  2020  shall  be  30  June  and  31  October  of  every  year  for 
the  amounts:  
(a) referred  to  in  Article  45(2); 
(b) referred  to  in  Article  80(1); 
(c) referred  to  in  points  (a),  (c),  (e)  and  (f)  of  Article  129(3)  by  the  earlier  date  following  the 
date  of  adjustment,  or  correction; 
(d) resulting  from  corrective  measures  to  be  taken  by  the  United  Kingdom  with  regard  to 
own  resources  due  for  financial  years  until  2020  as  a  result  of  controls  executed  under 
Regulation  (EU,  Euratom)  No°608/2014  or  Regulation  (EEC,  Euratom)  No°1553/89  or  for 
any  other  reason,  by  the  earlier  date  following  the  date  of  the  corrective  measure; 
(e) referred  to  in  Article  133(4)  in  two  instalments  in  relation  to  the  reference  dates  for 
payments;  the  first  instalment  amounting  to  half  of  the  second  one; 
(f) referred  to  in  Article  134,  by  the  earlier  date  following  the  adjustment  of  the  own 
resources  for  the  Member  States  resulting  from  the  definitive  entry  of  the  fine  into  the 
Union  budget; 
(g) referred  to  in  point  (1),  (2)  and  (5)  in  Article  135  by  the  earlier  date  following  the  date  of 
the  communication  referred  to  in  (3)  or  by  the  date  specified  in  (5); 
(h) referred  to  in  Articles  136  to  137  by  the  earlier  date  following  the  date  of  the 
communication  referred  in  136(4)  and  137  (2); 
(i) referred  to  in  Articles  138  and  139;  
94      
94     
(j) referred  to  in  Article  140(2),  by  the  earlier  date  following  the  date  of  the  communication 
referred  to  therein; 
(k) referred  to  in  paragraph  3  as  possible  accrued  interest. 
Payments  shall  be  made  in  4  equal  monthly  instalments  for  payments  that  have  a  reference  date 
of  30  June  and  in  8  equal  monthly  instalments  for  payments  that  have  a  reference  date  of  31 
October.  All  payments  shall  be  made  by  the  last  working  day  of  each  month,  starting  on  the 
reference  date. 
2.   As  long  as  there  are  still  payments  to  be  made  by  the  Union  to  the  United  Kingdom  or  by  the 
United  Kingdom  to  the  Union,  the  Union  shall  communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  16  April 
and  on  16  September  of  each  year  a  document  specifying  the  relevant  amounts,  expressed  in 
euro  and  in  British  pounds,  based  on  the  conversion  rate  applied  by  the  European  Central  Bank 
on  the  first  working  day  of  the  month.  The  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom  shall  pay  the  net 
amounts  by  the  dates  referred  to  in  paragraph  1. 
3.   Any  delay  in  payments  by  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  Union  or  by  the  Union  to  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  be  subject  to  the  payment  of  interest  in  accordance  with  Article  12  of  Regulation 
(EU,  Euratom)  No  609/2014. 
CHAPTER  3 
European  Central  Bank  
Article  142 
Reimbursement  of  the  paid-­‐in  capital 
The  European  Central  Bank  shall  on  behalf  of  the  Union  reimburse  to  the  Bank  of  England  the  paid-­‐in 
capital  provided  by  it.  The  date  of  the  reimbursement  and  other  practical  arrangements  shall  be 
established  in  accordance  with  Protocol  (No  4)  on  the  Statute  of  the  European  System  of  Central 
Banks  and  of  the  European  Central  Bank. 
CHAPTER  4 
European  Investment  Bank  
Article  143 
Continued  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  reimbursement  of  the  paid-­‐in  capital 
1.   The  United  Kingdom  shall  remain  liable,  in  accordance  with  this  Article,  for  the  financial 
operations  approved  by  the  EIB  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  as  further 
specified  in  paragraph  2  (“EIB  financial  operations”),  even  if  the  resulting  financial  exposure  is 
assumed  on  or  after  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  as  well  as  for  other  risks 
assumed  by  the  EIB  as  set  out  in  the  following  subparagraph. 
The  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  shall  extend  to  the  EIB  financial  operations,  and  to  asset-­‐
liability  management  risks  and  operational  risks  attributable  to  the  EIB  financial  operations,  in 
accordance  with  paragraph  6.  For  other  such  risks  not  associated  with  specific  financial 
operations  and  not  attributable  to  the  stock  of  financial  operations  built  after  the  date  of  entry 
into  force  of  this  Agreement,  the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  proportional  to  the  ratio 
between  the  remaining  exposure  due  to  EIB  financial  operations  and  the  total  amount  of 
95      
95     
financial  operations  at  the  time  the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  is  triggered  in  accordance 
with  paragraph  6. 
The  implementation  of  any  post-­‐withdrawal  growth  strategy  of  the  EIB  is  not  covered  by  the 
scope  of  this  Article. 
2.  The  EIB  financial  operations  shall  include  loans,  guarantees,  fund  investments,  equity 
investments,  bonds  and  other  loan  substitute  products,  and  any  other  financing  operations,  with 
counterparties  or  regarding  projects  inside  and  outside  the  territory  of  the  Member  States, 
including  operations  guaranteed  by  third  parties  including  the  Member  States  or  the  Union. 
The  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  for  EIB  financial  operations  shall  apply  where  the  financial 
exposure  of  the  EIB: 
(a)   is  based  on  an  approval  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  EIB  given  prior  to  the  date  of 
entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  or  on  a  decision  adopted  on  the  basis  of  a  delegation 
by  the  Board  of  Directors  given  prior  to  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement; 
(b)    results  from  the  restructuring  of  an  EIB  financial  operation,  to  the  extent  that  such 
restructuring  does  not  increase  the  financial  exposure  to  the  counterparty,  in  nominal 
terms,  as  it  stood  immediately  prior  to  the  restructuring; 
(c)    results  from  a  change  to  an  EIB  financial  operation  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  EIB 
approved  on  or  after  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  to  the  extent  that 
such  change  does  not  increase  the  financial  exposure  to  the  counterparty  as  it  stood 
immediately  prior  to  the  change;  or 
(d)    results  from  the  institutional  participation  of  the  EIB  in  the  capital  of  the  EIF  and  the 
European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development,  as  it  stood  immediately  prior  to  the 
date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement. 
For  the  purposes  of  establishing  the  limits  to  the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to 
paragraphs  3  and  5,  the  exposure  of  the  EIB  on  account  of  EIB  financial  operations  which,  due  to 
their  nature,  are  not  subject  to  amortisation,  in  particular  equity-­‐type  investments,  revolving 
mandates  granted  to  the  EIF,  and  the  participation  in  the  capital  of  the  EIF  and  the  European 
Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development,  shall  be  considered  to  amortise  as  follows:  for  a 
period  of  10  years  from  the  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  the  amount  of  the  non-­‐amortising 
exposure  under  the  EIB  financial  operation  shall  be  considered  to  remain  at  the  amount  as 
approved  by  the  EIB  prior  to  the  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  reduced  by  any  disposal 
made  by  the  EIB  since  this  date.  After  this  period,  the  amount  shall  be  treated  as  decreasing  in 
proportion  to  the  amortisation  of  the  remaining  amortising  exposure  on  account  of  EIB  financial 
operations. 
3.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  1,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  liable  for  its  share  of  the  uncalled 
subscribed  capital  of  the  EIB  as  it  stood  immediately  prior  to  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this 
Agreement.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  make  payments  to  the  EIB,  up  to  the  amount  of  its  liability 
pursuant  to  this  paragraph,  when  its  liability  is  triggered  in  accordance  with  paragraph  6. 
That  total  liability  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  shall  at  no  point  exceed  the  amount  of  the  share  of 
the  United  Kingdom  of  the  uncalled  subscribed  capital  of  the  EIB  as  it  stood  immediately  prior  to 
the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement.  
When  the  amount  of  the  remaining  exposure  of  the  EIB  under  the  EIB  financial  operations 
referred  to  in  paragraph  1  is  lower  than  the  total  amount  of  subscribed  capital  of  the  EIB  as  it 
96      
96     
stood  immediately  prior  to  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  the  amount  of  the 
liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  shall,  at  any  time,  be  limited  to  an 
amount  obtained  by  applying  the  ratio  of  the  United  Kingdom  subscribed  capital  of  the  EIB  and 
the  total  subscribed  capital  of  the  EIB  as  they  stood  immediately  prior  to  the  date  of  entry  into 
force  of  this  Agreement  ("the  United  Kingdom  share  of  the  subscribed  capital")  to  the  difference 
between  (a)  the  amount  of  that  remaining  exposure  at  that  time,  and  (b)  the  total  paid-­‐in 
subscribed  capital  of  the  EIB  as  it  stood  immediately  prior  to  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this 
Agreement.  
4.  The  EIB  shall  pay  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  behalf  of  the  Union  an  amount  equal  to  the  share  of 
the  United  Kingdom  of  the  paid-­‐in  subscribed  capital  of  the  EIB  as  it  stood  immediately  prior  to 
the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement.  The  payment  shall  be  made  in  accordance  with 
Protocol  No  5  on  the  Statute  of  the  European  Investment  Bank.  It  shall  be  made  in  12  yearly 
instalments.  The  first  11  instalments,  each  equal  to  EUR  300  000  000,  shall  be  due  on  15 
December  of  each  year  starting  in  2019.  The  balance  of  EUR  195  903  950  shall  be  due  on  15 
December  2030.  The  payments  made  in  accordance  with  this  paragraph  shall  not  release  the 
United  Kingdom  from  its  liability  in  accordance  with  paragraph  5. 
5.  In  addition  to  its  liability  in  accordance  with  paragraph  3,  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  1,  the 
United  Kingdom  shall  be  liable  for  its  paid-­‐in  subscribed  capital  in  the  EIB  as  it  stood  immediately 
prior  to  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  make  payments 
to  the  EIB,  up  to  the  amount  of  its  liability  in  accordance  with  this  paragraph,  when  its  liability  is 
triggered  in  accordance  with  paragraph  6. 
The  total  liability  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  shall  at  no  point  exceed  the  amount  of  the  paid-­‐in 
subscribed  capital  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  EIB  as  it  stood  immediately  prior  to  the  date  of 
entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement.  
When  the  remaining  exposure  of  the  EIB  on  account  of  the  EIB  financial  operations  referred  to  in 
paragraph  1  is  lower  than  the  total  paid-­‐in  subscribed  capital  of  the  EIB  as  it  stood  immediately 
prior  to  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  the  amount  of  the  liability  of  the  United 
Kingdom  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  shall,  at  any  time,  be  limited  to  an  amount  obtained  by 
applying  the  ratio  of  the  United  Kingdom  share  of  the  subscribed  capital  to  the  amount  of  that 
remaining  exposure  at  that  time. 
6.  The  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  this  Article  shall  be  triggered,  on  a  pari-­‐
passu  basis  with  respect  to  the  Member  States,  in  the  event  that  the  EIB  requires  the  Member 
States  to  make  payments  on  account  of  their  uncalled  subscribed  capital  or  when  the  paid-­‐in 
subscribed  capital  of  the  Member  States  is  used.  
When  the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  paragraph  3  is  triggered,  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  pay  the  amount  due  to  the  EIB  under  the  same  conditions  (including  the  timing 
and  the  terms  of  the  payment)  as  apply  to  the  Member  States,  as  decided  by  the  Board  of 
Directors  of  the  EIB  at  the  relevant  time.  The  decision  of  the  EIB  requiring  the  Member  States  to 
make  payments  on  account  of  their  uncalled  subscribed  capital  may,  in  particular,  be  related  to 
the  nature  of  the  underlying  risk  events  and  the  financial  position  of  the  EIB  in  the  light  of  its 
payment  obligations,  the  state  of  its  assets  and  liabilities,  its  standing  in  capital  markets,  and  the 
provisions  of  its  contingency  and  recovery  planning  as  applicable  at  the  relevant  time. 
When  the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  paragraph  5  is  triggered,  the  United 
Kingdom  shall  pay  the  amount  due  to  the  EIB,  in  euro,  within  30  calendar  days  from  the  first 
demand  from  the  EIB,  and  subject  to  the  fourth  subparagraph. 
97      
97     
The  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  triggered  in  accordance  with  paragraph  5  shall  be  fulfilled 
from  the  share  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  paid-­‐in  subscribed  capital  of  the  EIB  as  it  stood 
immediately  prior  to  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  up  to  the  amount  not  yet 
paid  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  paragraph  4.  The  amount  of  annual  instalments 
referred  to  in  paragraph  4  shall  be  reduced  accordingly.  If  the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom 
cannot  be  fully  met  in  accordance  with  this  method,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  pay  to  the  EIB  the 
remaining  amount  due. 
The  EIB  shall,  on  behalf  of  the  Union,  in  each  case  establish  the  attribution  of  the  events 
underlying  the  triggering  of  the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  relevant  stock  of  financial 
operations  or  risks  and  the  amount  which  the  United  Kingdom  is  obliged  to  pay  to  the  EIB  as 
follows: 
(a)   to  the  extent  that  underlying  events  are  attributable  to  EIB  financial  operations,  or  to 
associated  asset-­‐liability  management  risk  or  operational  risk,  the  United  Kingdom  shall 
pay  to  the  EIB  an  amount  equal  to  the  United  Kingdom  share  of  the  subscribed  capital  of 
the  total  sum  which  the  Member  States  are  required  to  pay,  or  an  amount  equal  to  the 
United  Kingdom  share  of  the  subscribed  capital  of  the  total  sum  by  which  the  paid-­‐in 
subscribed  capital  of  the  Member  States  is  used,  respectively;  
(b)    to  the  extent  that  underlying  events  are  attributable  to  other  risks,  and  not  attributable 
to  any  specific  financial  operation  or  the  stock  of  financial  operations  built  after  the  date 
of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  pay  to  the  EIB  the 
amount  resulting  from  point  (a)  multiplied  by  the  ratio  of  the  remaining  exposure  due  to 
EIB  financial  operations  to  the  total  amount  of  financial  operations  at  the  time  the 
liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  is  triggered.  
7.  Except  for  the  payments  provided  for  in  paragraph  4,  the  EIB  shall  not  be  obliged  to  make  any 
other  payment,  return  or  remuneration  on  account  of  the  termination  of  the  membership  of  the 
United  Kingdom  of  the  EIB  or  on  account  of  the  retention  by  the  United  Kingdom  of  a  liability  in 
accordance  with  this  Article. 
8.  On  31  July  2019,  the  EIB  shall  communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom  the  exposure  under  the  EIB 
financial  operations,  and  the  limit  to  the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with 
paragraphs  3  and  5,  reflecting  the  financial  situation  of  the  EIB  and  the  liability  of  the  United 
Kingdom  as  of  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement. 
On  31  March  of  every  year,  starting  in  2020  and  until  the  extinction  of  the  liability  of  the  United 
Kingdom  in  accordance  with  this  Article,  the  EIB  shall  communicate  to  the  United  Kingdom  the 
remaining  exposure  under  the  EIB  financial  operations,  and  the  limit  to  the  liability  of  the  United 
Kingdom  in  accordance  with  paragraphs  3  and  5,  reflecting  the  financial  situation  of  the  EIB  and 
the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  as  of  31  December  of  the  preceding  year.  The  report  shall  also 
disclose  any  material  changes  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  EIB,  have  a  material  impact  on  the 
liability  of  the  United  Kingdom.  The  EIB  should  also  provide  timely  information  if  such  changes 
occur  during  the  year. 
The  EIB  shall  provide  to  the  United  Kingdom  timely  information  regarding  an  upcoming  triggering 
of  the  liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  this  Article  in  line  with  the  information 
provided  to  the  Member  States.  The  information  provided  shall  include  information  on  the 
nature  of  the  triggering  event  and  the  calculation  of  the  amounts  to  be  paid.  The  United  Kingdom 
shall  treat  this  information  as  strictly  confidential  until  the  EIB  lifts  the  confidentiality  or  until  the 
liability  of  the  United  Kingdom  is  triggered,  whichever  occurs  first. 
98      
98     
Article  144 
Participation  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  EIB  group  after  the  withdrawal  date 
As  from  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  projects  located  in 
the  United  Kingdom  shall  not  be  eligible  for  new  financial  operations  from  the  EIB  group  reserved  for 
Member  States,  including  those  under  Union  mandates.  Entities  established  in  the  United  Kingdom 
shall  be  treated  as  entities  located  outside  the  Union. 
The  signature  of  financial  operations  related  to  United  Kingdom,  United  Kingdom  entities  or  United 
Kingdom  projects  approved  by  the  EIB  group  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement 
may  take  place  after  this  date  on  the  same  basis  as  they  were  originally  approved. 
CHAPTER  5 
European  Development  Fund  and  the  United  Kingdom's  guarantee  under  the  EDF  Internal 
Agreements  
Article  145 
Participation  in  the  European  Development  Fund 
1.   The  United  Kingdom  shall  remain  party  to  the  European  Development  Fund  ("EDF")  until  the 
closure  of  the  11 th  EDF  and  all  previous  unclosed  EDFs,  and  shall  in  this  respect  assume  the  same 
obligations  as  the  Member  States  under  the  Internal  Agreement 133  by  which  it  was  set  up  ('the 
11 th  EDF  Internal  Agreement'),  as  well  as  the  obligations  resulting  from  previous  EDFs  until  their 
closure,  including  obligations  under  Council  Regulations  (EU)  2015/322 134  and  (EU)  2015/323 135 , 
subject  to  the  conditions  laid  down  in  this  Agreement.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  be  bound  by  the 
decisions  of  the  Council  setting  out  the  annual  contribution  of  Member  States  as  adopted  under 
Article  21  of  Regulation  (EU)  2015/323.  United  Kingdom  beneficiaries  shall  remain  eligible  to 
participate  in  projects  under  the  11 th  EDF  and  previous  ones  under  the  same  conditions  as  before 
the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement. 
2.  By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  6  of  this  Agreement,  the  United  Kingdom  may  participate,  as 
observer,  without  voting  rights,  in  the  EDF  Committee  as  established  in  accordance  with  Article  8 
of  the  11 th  EDF  Internal  Agreement  and  in  the  Investment  Facility  Committee  as  established  in 
accordance  with  Article  9  of  the  11 th  EDF  Internal  Agreement.  
3.  The  overseas  countries  and  territories  referred  to  in  point  (c)  of  Article  3(1)  shall  benefit  from  the 
11 th  EDF  until  its  closure  and  from  previous  EDFs  until  their  closure. 
                                                            
133  
Internal  Agreement  between  the  Representatives  of  the  Governments  of  the  Member  States  of  the 
European  Union,  meeting  within  the  Council,  on  the  financing  of  European  Union  aid  under  the 
multiannual  financial  framework  for  the  period  2014  to  2020,  in  accordance  with  the  ACP-­‐EU 
Partnership  Agreement,  and  on  the  allocation  of  financial  assistance  for  the  Overseas  Countries  and 
Territories  to  which  Part  Four  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  applies  (OJ  L 
210,  6.8.2013,  p.  1). 
134  
Council  Regulation  (EU)  2015/322  of  2  March  2015  on  the  implementation  of  the  11th  European 
Development  Fund  (OJ  L  58,  3.3.2015,  p.  1). 
135  
Council  Regulation  (EU)  2015/323  of  2  March  2015  on  the  financial  regulation  applicable  to  the  11th 
European  Development  Fund  (OJ  L  58,  3.3.2015,  p.  17). 
99      
99     
4.  The  United  Kingdom's  share  of  the  Investment  Facility  of  the  EDF  from  successive  EDF  periods 
shall  be  reimbursed  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  investment  matures.  The  method  for  making 
this  reimbursement  shall  be  the  same  as  the  method  set  out  in  Article  137.  Unless  agreed 
otherwise,  the  United  Kingdom’s  capital  share  shall  not  be  recommitted  beyond  the  end  of  the 
11 th  EDF  commitment  period  or  rolled  over  into  subsequent  periods. 
Article  146 
Reuse  of  the  decommitments 
Where  the  amounts  from  projects  under  the  10 th  EDF  or  from  previous  EDFs  have  not  been 
committed  in  accordance  with  Article  1(3)  of  the  11 th  EDF  Internal  Agreement,  or  have  been 
decommitted  in  accordance  with  to  Article  1(4)  of  the  11 th  EDF  Internal  Agreement  on  the  date  of 
entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  the  United  Kingdom's  share  of  those  amounts  shall  not  be  reused.  
The  first  paragraph  shall  apply  to  the  United  Kingdom's  share  of  funds  not  committed  or 
decommitted  under  the  11 th  EDF  after  31  December  2020.  
Article  147 
The  United  Kingdom  guarantee  under  the  successive  EDF  Internal  Agreements  
The  United  Kingdom  shall  remain  liable  in  respect  of  its  guarantee  under  Article  9  of  the  4 th  EDF 
Internal  Agreement 136 ,  Article  8  of  the  5 th137 ,  6 th138 ,  7 th139  and  8 th  EDF  Internal  Agreement 140 ,  Article  6 
of  the  9 th  EDF  Internal  Agreement 141  and  Article  4  of  the  10 th142  and  11 th  EDF  Internal  Agreement.  
The  United  Kingdom  shall  remain  entitled  to  its  respective  share  of  any  amounts  recovered  under  the 
terms  of  its  guarantees  and  to  the  balance  of  its  Member  State  Call  Account.  
CHAPTER  6 
Trust  Funds  and  Facility  for  refugees  in  Turkey 
Article  148 
Commitments  toward  the  Trust  Funds  and  the  Facility  for  Refugees  in  Turkey 
1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  honour  the  commitments  it  made  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force 
of  this  Agreement  to  the  European  Union  Emergency  Trust  Fund  for  stability  and  addressing  root 
causes  of  irregular  migration  and  displaced  persons  in  Africa,  established  by  Commission  Decision 
of  20  October  2015 143 ,  to  any  future  European  Union  Trust  Fund  created  before  the  date  of  entry 
                                                            
136  
OJ  L  25,  30.1.1976,  p.  168. 
137  
OJ  L  347,  22.12.1980,  p.  210. 
138  
OJ  L  86,  31.3.1986,  p.  210. 
139  
OJ  L  229,  17.8.1991,  p.  288. 
140  
OJ  L  156,  29.5.1998,  p.  108. 
141  
OJ  L  317,  15.12.2000,  p.  355. 
142  
OJ  L  247,  9.9.2006,  p.  30. 
143  
Commission  Decision  of  20  October  2015  on  the  establishment  of  a  European  Union  Emergency  Trust 
Fund  for  stability  and  addressing  root  causes  of  irregular  migration  and  displaced  persons  in  Africa 
(C(2015)  7293). 
100       
100      
into  force  of  this  Agreement,  and  to  the  Facility  for  Refugees  in  Turkey,  established  by 
Commission  decision  of  24  November  2015 144  [and  the  future  Commission  decision].  
2.  The  United  Kingdom  may  participate  in  the  relevant  bodies  related  to  the  Facility  for  Refugees  in 
Turkey  following  the  rules  established  for  donors  in  accordance  with  Article  187(4)  of  the 
Financial  Regulation.  
CHAPTER  7 
Agencies  of  the  Council  and  Common  Security  and  Defence  Policy  operations 
Article  149 
The  United  Kingdom's  obligations  from  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement 
Until  31  December  2020,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  contribute  to  the  financing  of  the  European 
Defence  Agency,  the  European  Union  Institute  for  Security  Studies,  and  the  European  Union  Satellite 
Centre,  as  well  as  to  the  costs  of  Common  Security  and  Defence  Policy  operations,  on  the  basis  of  the 
same  contribution  key  as  before  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  in  accordance  with 
Article  4a. 
Article  150 
The  United  Kingdom's  obligations  after  31  December  2020 
1.  Based  on  the  accounts  of  the  agencies  and  to  the  extent  that  the  relevant  liabilities  have  not 
been  provisioned  on  31  December  2020,  the  United  Kingdom  shall  pay  its  share  of  the  following 
liabilities  in  accordance  with  its  financing  key  for  each  of  those  agencies  on  the  basis  of  their 
audited  accounts  on  31  December  2020: 
(a) the  pension  liabilities  for  the  personnel  of  the  European  Defence  Agency,  the  European 
Union  Institute  for  Security  Studies,  and  the  European  Union  Satellite  Centre; 
(b) any  liabilities  arising  from  the  liquidation  of  the  Western  European  Union. 
2.  The  payment  in  relation  to  the  liabilities  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  shall  be  made  by  30  June 
2021.  
                                                            
144  
Commission  Decision  of  24  November  2015  on  the  coordination  of  the  actions  of  the  Union  and  of  the 
Member  States  through  a  coordination  mechanism  —  the  Refugee  Facility  for  Turkey  (OJ  C  407, 
8.12.2015,  p.  8). 
101       
101      
PART  SIX 
INSTITUTIONAL  AND  FINAL  PROVISIONS 
TITLE  I 
CONSISTENT  INTERPRETATION  AND  APPLICATION 
Article  151 
References  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  concerning  Part  Two 
1.   Where,  in  a  case  which  has  commenced  at  first  instance  within  8  years  from  the  end  of  the 
transition  period  before  a  court  or  tribunal  in  the  United  Kingdom,  a  question  is  raised 
concerning  the  interpretation  of  Part  Two  of  this  Agreement,  and  where  that  court  or  tribunal 
considers  that  a  decision  on  that  question  is  necessary  to  enable  it  to  give  judgment  in  that  case, 
it  may  request  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  to  give  a  preliminary  ruling  on  that 
question.  
However,  where  the  subject  matter  of  the  case  before  a  court  or  tribunal  in  the  United  Kingdom 
is  a  decision  on  an  application  made  pursuant  to  Article  17  paragraphs  (1)  or  (4)  or  Article  17a,  a 
request  for  a  preliminary  ruling  may  be  made  only  where  the  case  has  commenced  at  first 
instance  within  eight  years  from  the  date  from  which  Article  17a  applies. 
2.   The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall  have  jurisdiction  to  give  preliminary  rulings  on 
requests  pursuant  to  paragraph  1.  The  legal  effects  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  such  preliminary 
rulings  shall  be  the  same  as  the  legal  effects  of  preliminary  rulings  given  pursuant  to  Article  267 
TFEU  in  the  Union  and  its  Member  States.  
Article  152 
Monitoring  of  the  implementation  and  application  of  Part  Two  
1.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  implementation  and  application  of  Part  Two  shall  be  monitored  by  an 
independent  authority  (the  "Authority")  which  shall  have  equivalent  powers  to  those  of  the 
Commission  acting  under  the  Treaties  to  conduct  inquiries  on  its  own  initiative  concerning 
alleged  breaches  of  Part  Two  of  this  Agreement  by  the  administrative  authorities  of  the  United 
Kingdom  and  to  receive  complaints  from  Union  citizens  and  their  family  members  for  the 
purposes  of  conducting  such  inquiries.  The  Authority  shall  also  have  the  right,  following  such 
complaints,  to  bring  a  legal  action  before  a  competent  court  or  tribunal  in  the  United  Kingdom  in 
an  appropriate  judicial  procedure  with  a  view  to  seeking  adequate  remedy. 
2.  The  Commission  and  the  Authority  shall  each  inform  annually  the  specialised  Committee  on 
citizens’  rights  on  the  implementation  and  application  of  Part  Two  in  the  Union,  and  in  the 
United  Kingdom  respectively.  This  information  shall,  in  particular,  cover  measures  taken  to 
implement  or  comply  with  Part  Two  and  the  number  and  nature  of  complaints  received. 
3.  The  Joint  Committee  shall  asses,  no  earlier  than  8  years  after  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  the 
functioning  of  the  Authority.  Following  such  assessment,  it  may  decide,  in  good  faith,  pursuant  to 
Articles  157(4)(g)  and  159,  that  the  United  Kingdom  may  abolish  the  Authority. 
102       
102      
Article  153 
Jurisdiction  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  concerning  Parts  Three  and  certain 
provisions  of  Part  Five 
Without  prejudice  to  Article  83  of  this  Agreement,  Articles  258,  260,  and  267  TFEU  shall  apply  in 
respect  of  the  interpretation  and  application  of  Part  Three  of  this  Agreement  and  of  applicable  Union 
law  referred  to  in  Article  129  and  Article  131(1)  or  (2)  of  this  Agreement.  To  this  effect,  any  reference 
made  in  Articles  258,  260,  and  267  TFEU  to  a  Member  State  shall  be  read  as  including  the  United 
Kingdom. * 
Article  154 
Submission  of  statements  of  case  or  written  observations  and  participation  in  the  procedure 
Where  a  court  or  tribunal  of  a  Member  State  refers  a  question  concerning  the  interpretation  of  this 
Agreement  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  for  a  preliminary  ruling,  the  decision  of  the 
national  court  or  tribunal  containing  that  question  shall  be  notified  to  the  United  Kingdom.  The 
United  Kingdom  shall  be  entitled  to  participate  in  the  procedure  before  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the 
European  Union  in  the  same  way  as  Member  States. 
Article  155 
Participation  of  the  European  Commission  in  cases  pending  in  the  United  Kingdom 
Where  the  consistent  interpretation  and  application  of  Part  Two  of  this  Agreement  so  requires,  the 
European  Commission  may  submit  written  observations  to  the  courts  or  the  tribunals  in  the  United 
Kingdom  in  pending  cases  where  the  interpretation  of  the  Agreement  is  concerned.  The  European 
Commission  may,  with  the  permission  of  the  court  or  tribunal  in  question,  also  make  oral 
observations.  The  European  Commission  shall  inform  the  United  Kingdom  of  its  intention  to  submit 
observations  before  formally  doing  so. 
Article  156 
Regular  dialogue  and  exchange  of  information  
In  order  to  facilitate  the  consistent  interpretation  of  this  Agreement  and  in  full  deference  to  the 
independence  of  courts,  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom's 
highest  courts  shall  engage  in  a  regular  dialogue,  analogous  to  the  one  which  the  Court  of  Justice  of 
the  European  Union  pursues  with  the  highest  courts  of  the  Member  States. 
  
                                                            
*  
The  content  of  Article  153  is  agreed  in  its  entirety  in  relation  to  applicable  Union  law  referred  to  in 
Article  129  and  Article  131(1)  or  (2)  of  this  Agreement.  This  is  without  prejudice  to  Article  131(5).  
103       
103      
TITLE  II 
INSTITUTIONAL  PROVISIONS 
Article  157 
Joint  Committee  
1.   A  Joint  Committee  is  hereby  established,  comprising  representatives  of  the  Union  and  of  the 
United  Kingdom.  The  Joint  Committee  shall  be  co-­‐chaired  by  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom. 
2.   The  Joint  Committee  shall  meet  at  the  request  of  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom  or  at  least 
once  a  year.  The  Joint  Committee  shall  set  its  meeting  schedule  and  its  agenda  by  mutual 
consent. 
3.   The  Joint  Committee  shall  be  responsible  for  the  implementation  and  application  of  this 
Agreement.  The  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom  may  refer  to  the  Joint  Committee  any  issue 
relating  to  the  implementation,  application  and  interpretation  of  this  Agreement. 
4.   The  Joint  Committee  shall: 
(a)   supervise  and  facilitate  the  implementation  and  application  of  this  Agreement; 
(b)    decide  on  the  tasks  of  the  specialised  committees  and  supervise  their  work; 
(c)    seek  appropriate  ways  and  methods  of  preventing  problems  that  might  arise  in  areas 
covered  by  this  Agreement  or  of  resolving  disputes  that  may  arise  regarding  the 
interpretation  and  application  of  this  Agreement; 
(d)    adopt  its  own  rules  of  procedure,  as  well  as  rules  of  procedure  of  the  specialised 
committees; 
(e)    consider  any  matter  of  interest  relating  to  an  area  covered  by  this  Agreement; 
(f)    adopt  decisions  and  make  recommendations  as  set  out  in  Article  159;  
(g)   adopt  amendments  to  this  Agreement  in  the  cases  provided  for  in  this  Agreement. 
5.   The  Joint  Committee  may: 
(a)   delegate  responsibilities  to  the  specialised  committees,  except  those  referred  to  in 
points  (b),  (d),  (f)  and  (g)  of  paragraph  4;  
(b)    establish  other  specialised  committees  than  those  established  by  Article  158  in  order  to 
assist  it  in  the  performance  of  its  tasks;  
(c)    change  the  tasks  assigned  to  the  specialised  committees  or  dissolve  any  of  those 
committees;  and 
(d)    take  such  other  action  in  the  exercise  of  its  functions  as  decided  by  the  Union  and  the 
United  Kingdom. 
6.   The  Joint  Committee  shall  issue  an  annual  report  on  the  functioning  of  this  Agreement. 
104       
104      
Article  158 
Specialised  committees  
1. The  following  specialised  committees  are  hereby  established:  
(a) the  Committee  on  citizens'  rights; 
(b) the  Committee  on  the  other  separation  provisions; 
(c) the  Committee  on  issues  related  to  the  implementation  of  the  Protocol  on 
Ireland/Northern  Ireland; 
(d) the  Committee  on  issues  related  to  the  implementation  of  the  Protocol  relating  to  the 
Sovereign  Base  Areas  in  Cyprus; 
(e) the  Committee  on  the  financial  provisions. 
2. Unless  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement,  or  unless  the  co-­‐chairs  decide  otherwise,  the 
specialised  committees  shall  meet  at  least  once  a  year.  Additional  meetings  may  be  held  at  the 
request  of  the  Union,  the  United  Kingdom,  or  of  the  Joint  Committee.  They  shall  be  co-­‐chaired  by 
representatives  of  the  Union  and  of  the  United  Kingdom.  The  specialised  committees  shall  set 
their  meeting  schedule  and  agenda  by  mutual  consent.  The  specialised  committees  may  draw  up 
draft  decisions  and  recommendations  and  refer  them  for  adoption  by  the  Joint  Committee. 
3. The  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  shall  ensure  that  their  respective  representatives  on  the 
specialised  committees  have  the  appropriate  expertise  with  respect  to  the  issues  under 
discussion. 
4. The  specialised  committees  shall  inform  the  Joint  Committee  of  their  meeting  schedules  and 
agenda  sufficiently  in  advance  of  their  meetings  and  shall  report  to  the  Joint  Committee  on 
results  and  conclusions  from  each  of  their  meetings.  The  creation  or  existence  of  a  specialised 
committee  shall  not  prevent  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom  from  bringing  any  matter  directly 
to  the  Joint  Committee. 
Article  159 
Decisions  and  recommendations 
1.   The  Joint  Committee  shall,  for  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  have  the  power  to  adopt 
decisions  in  respect  of  all  matters  for  which  this  Agreement  so  provides  and  make  appropriate 
recommendations  to  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom. 
2.   The  decisions  adopted  by  the  Joint  Committee  shall  be  binding  on  the  Union  and  the  United 
Kingdom,  and  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  shall  implement  them.  They  shall  have  the 
same  legal  effect  as  this  Agreement.  
3.   The  Joint  Committee  shall  adopt  its  decisions  and  make  its  recommendations  by  mutual  consent.  
105       
105      
TITLE  III 
DISPUTE  SETTLEMENT 
Article  160 
Cooperation  
The  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  shall,  at  all  times,  endeavour  to  agree  on  the  interpretation  and 
application  of  this  Agreement,  and  shall  make  every  attempt  through  cooperation  and  consultations 
to  arrive  at  a  mutually  satisfactory  resolution  of  any  matter  that  might  affect  its  operation. 
Article  161 
Exclusivity  
For  any  dispute  between  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  arising  under  this  Agreement,  the  Union 
and  the  United  Kingdom  shall  only  have  recourse  to  the  procedures  provided  for  in  this  Agreement. 
Article  162 
Settlement  of  disputes 
1.  Without  prejudice  to  Article  153,  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom  may  bring  any  dispute  which 
concerns  the  interpretation  or  application  of  this  Agreement  before  the  Joint  Committee. 
2.  The  Joint  Committee  may  settle  the  dispute  through  a  recommendation.  It  shall  be  provided  with 
all  information  which  might  be  of  use  in  making  possible  an  in-­‐depth  examination  of  the 
situation,  with  a  view  to  finding  an  acceptable  solution.  To  this  end,  the  Joint  Committee  shall 
examine  all  possibilities  to  maintain  the  good  functioning  of  the  Agreement.  
3.  The  Joint  Committee  may,  at  any  point,  decide  to  submit  the  dispute  brought  before  it  to  the 
Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  for  a  ruling.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union 
shall  have  jurisdiction  over  such  cases  and  its  rulings  shall  be  binding  on  the  Union  and  the 
United  Kingdom. 
4.  If  the  dispute  has  not  been  settled  within  3  months  after  it  was  brought  before  the  Joint 
Committee  and  has  not  been  submitted  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  by  the 
Joint  Committee  pursuant  to  paragraph  3,  the  dispute  may  be  submitted  to  the  Court  of  Justice 
of  the  European  Union  for  a  ruling  at  the  request  of  either  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom.  The 
Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall  have  jurisdiction  over  such  cases  and  its  rulings  shall 
be  binding  on  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom. 
Article  163 
Non-­‐compliance 
1.  Where  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom  consider  that  the  other  Party  has  not  taken  the 
necessary  measures  to  comply  with  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union 
resulting  from  proceedings  referred  to  in  Article  162:  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom,  as  the 
case  may  be,  may  bring  the  case  before  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union,  after  giving 
the  other  Party  the  opportunity  to  submit  its  observations.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European 
Union  shall  have  jurisdiction  over  such  cases  and  its  rulings  shall  be  binding  on  the  Union  and  the 
United  Kingdom.  If  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  finds  that  the  Union  or  the  United 
106       
106      
Kingdom,  as  the  case  may  be,  has  not  complied  with  its  judgment,  it  may  impose  a  lump  sum  or 
penalty  payment  on  it.  
2.  Where,  in  the  situation  referred  to  in  paragraph  1,  the  case  has  not  been  brought  before  the 
Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union,  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom,  as  the  case  may  be, 
may  decide  to  suspend:  
(a)   parts  of  this  Agreement  other  than  Part  Two;  or 
(b)    parts  of  any  other  agreement  between  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom,  under  the 
conditions  set  out  in  such  agreement.  
Any  suspension  shall  be  proportionate  to  the  breach  of  obligation  concerned,  taking  into  account 
the  gravity  of  the  breach  and  the  rights  in  question.  It  shall  be  subject  to  judicial  review  by  the 
Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union.  
The  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom,  as  the  case  may  be,  shall  inform  the  other  Party  of  its 
intention  to  suspend  and  allow  the  other  Party,  within  20  days,  to  remedy  the  situation.  Any 
suspension  shall  take  effect  no  earlier  than  20  days  after  its  notification  to  the  other  Party. 
Article  164 
Procedural  rules  and  powers 
Proceedings  brought  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  pursuant  to  Article  162  or  163 
shall  be  governed  by  the  Rules  of  Procedure  set  out  in  [Annex  y+3]  to  this  Agreement. 
Article  165 
Suspension  of  benefits  during  the  transition  period  
1.   Notwithstanding  Article  126  of  this  Agreement,  if  during  the  transition  period  the  Union 
considers  that  the  United  Kingdom  has  not  fulfilled,  during  the  transition  period,  an  obligation 
under  Union  law  as  found  in  a  judgment  rendered  pursuant  to  Article  126  of  this  Agreement  in 
accordance  with  Article  258  TFEU,  or  that  the  United  Kingdom  does  not  respect  an  order 
rendered  pursuant  to  Article  126  of  this  Agreement  in  accordance  with  Article  279  TFEU,  and 
where  the  functioning  of  the  internal  market,  of  the  customs  union,  or  the  financial  stability  of 
the  Union  or  its  Member  States  would  be  jeopardised  as  a  result,  the  Union  may  suspend  certain 
benefits  deriving  for  the  United  Kingdom  from  participation  in  the  internal  market. 
2.   When  applying  paragraph  1,  the  Union  shall  take  into  account  the  possible  consequences  of  such 
a  suspension  on  the  rights  and  obligations  of  natural  and  legal  persons.  Any  suspension  under 
paragraph  1  shall  be  proportionate  to  the  breach  of  obligation  concerned,  taking  into  account 
the  gravity  of  the  breach  and  the  rights  in  question,  and  shall  not  exceed  3  months.  It  may, 
however,  be  renewed. 
3.   The  Union  shall  inform  the  United  Kingdom  of  its  intention  to  apply  paragraph  1  and  allow  the 
United  Kingdom,  within  20  days,  to  remedy  the  situation.  Any  suspension  shall  take  effect  no 
earlier  than  20  days  after  its  notification  to  the  United  Kingdom.    
107       
107      
TITLE  IV 
FINAL  PROVISIONS 
Article  166 
Protocols  and  Annexes 
The  Protocol  on  Ireland  /  Northern  Ireland,  the  Protocol  relating  to  the  Sovereign  Base  Areas  in 
Cyprus,  and  Annexes  [y  to  y+6]  shall  form  an  integral  part  of  this  Agreement. 
Article  167 
Authentic  texts  and  depositary 
This  Agreement  is  drawn  up  in  a  single  original  in  the  Bulgarian,  Croatian,  Czech,  Danish,  Dutch, 
English,  Estonian,  Finnish,  French,  German,  Greek,  Hungarian,  Irish,  Italian,  Latvian,  Lithuanian, 
Maltese,  Polish,  Portuguese,  Romanian,  Slovak,  Slovenian,  Spanish  and  Swedish  languages,  the  texts 
in  each  of  these  languages  being  equally  authentic. 
The  Secretary  General  of  the  Council  shall  be  the  depositary  of  this  Agreement. 
Article  168 
Entry  into  force  and  application 
This  Agreement  shall  enter  into  force  on  30  March  2019.  In  case,  prior  to  that  date,  the  depositary  of 
this  Agreement  has  not  received  the  written  notification  of  the  completion  of  the  necessary  internal 
procedures  by  each  Party,  this  Agreement  may  not  enter  into  force.  When  making  the  written 
notification  referred  to  in  this  Article,  the  Union,  in  respect  of  any  of  its  Member  States  which  have 
raised  reasons  related  to  its  fundamental  structures,  may  declare  that,  during  the  transition  period, 
that  Member  State  will  not  surrender  its  nationals  pursuant  to  Framework  Decision  2002/584/JHA  to 
the  United  Kingdom;  in  such  a  case,  the  United  Kingdom  may  declare,  no  later  than  1  month  after  the 
receipt  of  the  Union  declaration,  that  it  will  not  surrender  its  nationals  to  that  Member  State. 
Parts  Two  and  Three,  with  the  exception  of  Articles  17a,  30(1),  40,  and  92(1),  as  well  as  Title  I  of  Part 
Six  and  Articles  162,  163  and  164,  shall  apply  as  from  the  end  of  the  transition  period.  
The  Protocol  on  Ireland/Northern  Ireland,  with  the  exception  of  Article  10  thereof,  shall  apply  as 
from  the  end  of  the  transition  period. 
The  Protocol  relating  to  the  Sovereign  Base  Areas  in  Cyprus  shall  apply  as  from  the  end  of  the 
transition  period. 
Done  on  [dd/mm/yyyy]. 
  
108       
108      
PROTOCOLS 
Protocol  on  Ireland/Northern  Ireland 
The  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom, 
HAVING  REGARD  to  the  historic  ties  and  enduring  nature  of  the  bilateral  relationship  between 
Ireland  and  the  United  Kingdom;  
RECALLING  that  the  United  Kingdom's  withdrawal  from  the  Union  presents  a  significant  and  unique 
challenge  to  the  island  of  Ireland,  and  reaffirming  that  the  achievements,  benefits  and  commitments 
of  the  peace  process  will  remain  of  paramount  importance  to  peace,  stability  and  reconciliation 
there; 
RECOGNISING  that  it  is  necessary  to  address  the  unique  circumstances  on  the  island  of  Ireland 
through  a  unique  solution  in  order  to  ensure  the  orderly  withdrawal  of  the  United  Kingdom  from  the 
Union; 
AFFIRMING  that  the  Good  Friday  or  Belfast  Agreement  of  10  April  1998  between  the  Government  of 
the  United  Kingdom,  the  Government  of  Ireland  and  the  other  participants  in  the  multi-­‐party 
negotiations  (the  "1998  Agreement"),  which  is  annexed  to  the  British-­‐Irish  Agreement  of  the  same 
date  (the  "British-­‐Irish  Agreement"),  including  its  subsequent  implementation  agreements  and 
arrangements,  should  be  protected  in  all  its  parts; 
RECOGNISING  that  cooperation  between  Northern  Ireland  and  Ireland  is  a  central  part  of  the  1998 
Agreement  and  is  essential  for  achieving  reconciliation  and  the  normalisation  of  relationships  on  the 
island  of  Ireland,  and  recalling  the  roles,  functions  and  safeguards  of  the  Northern  Ireland  Executive, 
the  Northern  Ireland  Assembly,  and  the  North-­‐South  Ministerial  Council  (including  cross-­‐community 
provisions),  as  set  out  in  the  1998  Agreement; 
RECALLING  the  commitment  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  protect  North-­‐South  cooperation  and  its 
guarantee  of  avoiding  a  hard  border,  including  any  physical  infrastructure  or  related  checks  and 
controls,  and  bearing  in  mind  that  any  future  arrangements  must  be  compatible  with  these 
overarching  requirements; 
RECALLING  that  the  Joint  Report  from  the  negotiators  of  the  European  Union  and  the  United 
Kingdom  Government  on  progress  during  phase  1  of  negotiations  under  Article  50  TEU  on  the  United 
Kingdom's  orderly  withdrawal  from  the  European  Union  of  8  December  2017  outlines  three  different 
scenarios  for  protecting  North-­‐South  cooperation  and  avoiding  a  hard  border; 
HIGHLIGHTING  that  discussions  on  the  other  scenarios  may  continue  to  be  pursued  in  parallel,  but 
that  this  Protocol  is  based  on  the  third  scenario  of  maintaining  full  alignment  with  those  rules  of  the 
Union's  internal  market  and  the  customs  union  which,  now  or  in  the  future,  support  North-­‐South 
cooperation,  the  all-­‐island  economy  and  the  protection  of  the  1998  Agreement,  and  that  it  applies 
unless  and  until  an  alternative  arrangement  implementing  another  scenario  is  agreed; 
ACKNOWLEDGING  that  this  cooperation  across  the  full  range  of  political,  economic,  societal  and 
agricultural  contexts  relies  to  a  significant  extent  on  common  Union  legal  and  policy  frameworks,  as 
confirmed  in  the  joint  mapping  exercise  conducted  by  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom,  and  that 
accordingly  the  United  Kingdom's  withdrawal  from  the  Union  gives  rise  to  substantial  challenges  to 
the  maintenance  and  development  of  North-­‐South  cooperation;  
MINDFUL  that  the  rights  and  obligations  of  Ireland  under  the  rules  of  the  Union's  internal  market  and 
customs  union  must  be  fully  respected; 
109       
109      
RECALLING  the  commitment  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  protecting  and  supporting  continued  North-­‐
South  and  East-­‐West  cooperation  across  the  full  range  of  political,  economic,  security,  societal  and 
agricultural  contexts  and  frameworks  of  cooperation,  including  the  continued  operation  of  the 
North-­‐South  Implementation  Bodies; 
AIMING  to  support  current  and  future  common  policies  and  approaches  between  Ireland  and 
Northern  Ireland  in  accordance  with  the  1998  Agreement; 
RECOGNISING  the  need  to  respect  the  provisions  of  the  1998  Agreement  regarding  the 
constitutional  status  of  Northern  Ireland  and  the  principle  of  consent; 
DESIRING  to  create  a  common  regulatory  area  on  the  island  of  Ireland  in  order  to  safeguard  North-­‐
South  cooperation,  the  all-­‐island  economy,  and  protect  the  1998  Agreement; 
HAVING  REGARD  to  the  devolution  arrangements  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  Northern 
Ireland;  
RECOGNISING  that  Irish  citizens  in  Northern  Ireland,  by  virtue  of  their  Union  citizenship,  will  continue 
to  enjoy,  exercise  and  have  access  to  rights,  opportunities  and  benefits,  and  that  this  Protocol  should 
respect  and  be  without  prejudice  to  the  rights,  opportunities  and  identity  that  come  with  citizenship 
of  the  Union  for  the  people  of  Northern  Ireland  who  choose  to  assert  their  right  to  Irish  citizenship  as 
defined  in  Annex  2  of  the  British-­‐Irish  Agreement  "Declaration  on  the  Provisions  of  Paragraph  (vi)  of 
Article  1  in  Relation  to  Citizenship";  
NOTING  that  Union  law  has  provided  a  supporting  framework  to  the  provisions  on  Rights,  Safeguards 
and  Equality  of  Opportunity  of  the  1998  Agreement; 
UNDERLINING  that  part  or  all  of  this  Protocol  may  cease  to  apply  should  a  future  agreement  between 
the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  be  agreed  which  addresses  the  unique  circumstances  on  the 
island  of  Ireland,  including  by  avoiding  a  hard  border  and  protecting  the  1998  Agreement  in  all  its 
dimensions; 
HAVE  AGREED  UPON  the  following  provisions,  which  shall  be  annexed  to  the  Agreement  on  the 
withdrawal  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  from  the  European  Union 
and  the  European  Atomic  Energy  Community  ("Withdrawal  Agreement"): 
Chapter  I 
Rights  of  individuals 
Article  1 
Rights  of  individuals 
1.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  ensure  that  no  diminution  of  rights,  safeguards  and  equality  of 
opportunity  as  set  out  in  that  part  of  the  1998  Agreement  entitled  Rights,  Safeguards  and 
Equality  of  Opportunity  results  from  its  withdrawal  from  the  Union,  including  in  the  area  of 
protection  against  discrimination  as  enshrined  in  the  provisions  of  Union  law  listed  in  Annex  1  to 
this  Protocol,  and  shall  implement  this  paragraph  through  dedicated  mechanisms.  
2.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  continue  to  facilitate  the  related  work  of  the  institutions  and  bodies 
set  up  pursuant  to  the  1998  Agreement,  including  the  Northern  Ireland  Human  Rights 
Commission,  the  Equality  Commission  for  Northern  Ireland  and  the  Joint  Committee  of 
representatives  of  the  Human  Rights  Commissions  of  Northern  Ireland  and  Ireland,  in  upholding 
human  rights  and  equality  standards. 
110       
110      
Chapter  II 
Movement  of  persons 
Article  2 
Common  Travel  Area 
1.  The  United  Kingdom  and  Ireland  may  continue  to  make  arrangements  between  themselves 
relating  to  the  movement  of  persons  between  their  territories  (the  "Common  Travel  Area"), 
while  fully  respecting  the  rights  of  natural  persons  conferred  by  Union  law.  
2.  The  United  Kingdom  shall  ensure  that  the  Common  Travel  Area  and  associated  rights  and 
privileges  can  continue  to  operate  without  affecting  the  obligations  of  Ireland  under  Union  law, 
in  particular  with  respect  to  free  movement  for  Union  citizens  and  their  family  members, 
irrespective  of  their  nationality,  to,  from  and  within  Ireland.  
Chapter  III 
Common  regulatory  area 
Article  3 
Establishment  of  a  common  regulatory  area  
A  common  regulatory  area  comprising  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern 
Ireland  is  hereby  established.  The  common  regulatory  area  shall  constitute  an  area  without  internal 
borders  in  which  the  free  movement  of  goods  is  ensured  and  North-­‐South  cooperation  protected  in 
accordance  with  this  Chapter.  
Article  4 
Free  movement  of  goods 
1.  The  provisions  of  Union  law  on  goods  listed  in  Annex  2.1  to  this  Protocol  shall  apply  to  and  in  the 
United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland. 
2.  Customs  legislation  as  defined  in  point  (2)  of  Article  5  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  of  the 
European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 145  as  well  as  other  provisions  of  Union  law  providing  for 
customs  controls  of  specific  goods  or  for  specific  purposes  listed  in  Annex  2.2  to  this  Protocol 
shall  apply  to  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland.  The  territory  of  Northern 
Ireland,  excluding  the  territorial  waters  of  the  United  Kingdom  (the  "territory  of  Northern 
Ireland"),  shall  be  considered  to  be  part  of  the  customs  territory  of  the  Union.  
3. Customs  duties  on  imports  and  exports,  and  any  charges  having  equivalent  effect,  shall  be 
prohibited  between  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland.  This 
prohibition  shall  also  apply  to  customs  duties  of  a  fiscal  nature.  
4. Quantitative  restrictions  on  imports  and  exports  and  all  measures  having  equivalent  effect  shall 
be  prohibited  between  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland. 
                                                            
145  
Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  9  October  2013  laying 
down  the  Union  Customs  Code  (OJ  L  269,  10.10.2013,  p.  1). 
111       
111      
5. The  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland  shall  not  impose,  directly  or 
indirectly,  on  the  products  of  the  other  party  any  internal  taxation  of  any  kind  in  excess  of  that 
imposed  directly  or  indirectly  on  similar  domestic  products.  Furthermore,  the  Union  and  the 
United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland  shall  not  impose  on  the  products  of  the  other 
party  any  internal  taxation  of  such  a  nature  as  to  afford  indirect  protection  to  other  products.  
6. Paragraph  4  shall  be  without  prejudice  to  the  possibility  for  the  United  Kingdom,  a  Member  State 
or  the  Union  to  take  measures  to  prohibit  or  restrict  the  making  available  on  its  market  of  a 
good,  or  a  category  of  goods,  where  and  to  the  extent  permitted  by  Union  law.  Such  prohibitions 
or  restrictions  shall  not,  however,  constitute  a  means  of  arbitrary  discrimination  or  a  disguised 
restriction  on  trade  between  the  Union  and  Northern  Ireland.  
7. For  the  purposes  of  the  customs  legislation  and  the  provisions  of  Union  law  listed  in  Annex  2.2  to 
this  Protocol,  the  United  Kingdom  customs  authorities  competent  for  the  territory  of  Northern 
Ireland  shall  be  considered  as  customs  authorities  within  the  meaning  of  point  (1)  of  Article  5  of 
Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013.  By  way  of  derogation  from  Section  7  of  Chapter  2  of  Title  I  of 
Regulation  (EU)  No  952/2013,  customs  controls  as  defined  in  point  (3)  of  Article  5  of  that 
Regulation  shall  be  carried  out  jointly  by  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  customs  authorities 
competent  for  the  territory  of  Northern  Ireland.  The  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  shall 
determine  the  practical  arrangements  for  carrying  out  such  controls  in  accordance  with 
paragraph  10. 
8. The  provisions  of  Union  law  on  value  added  tax  listed  in  Annex  2.3  to  this  Protocol  concerning 
goods  shall  apply  to  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland. 
9. The  provisions  of  Union  law  on  excise  duties  listed  in  Annex  2.4  to  this  Protocol  shall  apply  to  and 
in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland.  
10. Specific  arrangements  for  the  proper  implementation  of  this  Article  shall  be  determined  by  the 
Joint  Committee,  upon  proposal  from  the  Specialised  Committee.  Those  specific  arrangements 
may,  as  appropriate,  include  a  mechanism  for  revenue  collection  and  distribution. 
Article  5 
Agriculture  and  fisheries 
1.  The  provisions  of  Union  law  on  sanitary  and  phytosanitary  rules  listed  in  Annex  2.5  to  this 
Protocol  shall  apply  to  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland. 
2.  The  provisions  of  Union  law  on  the  production  and  marketing  of  agricultural  and  fisheries 
products  listed  in  Annex  2.6  to  this  Protocol  shall  apply  to  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect 
of  Northern  Ireland. 
Article  6 
Single  electricity  market 
The  provisions  of  Union  law  governing  wholesale  electricity  markets  listed  in  Annex  2.7  to  this 
Protocol  shall  apply  to  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland. 
112       
112      
Article  7 
Environment 
The  provisions  of  Union  law  for  environmental  protection  concerning  the  control  of  the  import  into, 
export  out  of,  release  into,  or  transport  within  the  Union  of  substances  or  material,  or  plant  or 
animal  species,  listed  in  Annex  2.8  to  this  Protocol  shall  apply  to  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  in 
respect  of  Northern  Ireland.  
Article  8 
Other  areas  of  North-­‐South  cooperation 
1. Consistent  with  the  arrangements  set  out  in  Articles  4  to  7  of  this  Protocol,  and  in  full  respect  of 
Union  law,  this  Protocol  shall  be  implemented  and  applied  so  as  to  maintain  the  necessary 
conditions  for  continued  North-­‐South  cooperation,  including  in  the  areas  of  environment,  health, 
agriculture,  transport,  education  and  tourism,  as  well  as  energy,  telecommunications, 
broadcasting,  inland  fisheries,  justice  and  security,  higher  education  and  sport.  In  full  respect  of 
Union  law,  the  United  Kingdom  and  Ireland  may  continue  to  make  new  arrangements  building  on 
the  provisions  of  the  1998  Agreement  in  other  areas  of  North-­‐South  cooperation  on  the  island  of 
Ireland. 
2. The  Joint  Committee  shall  keep  under  constant  review  the  extent  to  which  the  implementation 
and  application  of  this  Protocol  maintains  the  necessary  conditions  for  North-­‐South  cooperation. 
The  Joint  Committee  may,  including  on  recommendation  from  the  Specialised  Committee,  make 
appropriate  recommendations  to  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  this  respect.  
Article  9 
State  aid 
The  provisions  of  Union  law  on  aids  granted  by  States  listed  in  Annex  2.9  to  this  Protocol  shall  apply 
to  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland.  For  the  purposes  of  those  provisions,  "in 
respect  of  Northern  Ireland"  means  that  only  measures  that  affect  trade  between  the  territory  of 
Northern  Ireland  and  the  Union  shall  be  considered  as  aid  within  the  meaning  of  Article  107(1)  TFEU.  
Chapter  IV 
Institutional  provisions 
Article  10 
Specialised  Committee 
1.  The  Specialised  Committee  on  issues  related  to  the  implementation  of  the  Protocol  on 
Ireland/Northern  Ireland  established  by  Article  158  of  the  Withdrawal  Agreement  ("Specialised 
Committee")  shall  be  composed  of  representatives  from  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom. 
2.  The  Specialised  Committee  shall:  
(a)   facilitate  the  implementation  and  application  of  this  Protocol; 
113       
113      
(b)  examine  proposals  from  the  North-­‐South  Ministerial  Council,  and  North-­‐South 
Implementation  bodies  set  up  under  the  1998  Agreement  concerning  the 
implementation  and  application  of  this  Protocol; 
(c)  discuss  any  point  of  relevance  to  this  Protocol  giving  rise  to  a  difficulty  and  raised  by  the 
Union  or  the  United  Kingdom; 
(d)  make  recommendations  to  the  Joint  Committee  as  regards  the  functioning  of  this 
Protocol. 
Article  11 
Supervision  and  enforcement 
1.  As  regards  Chapter  III,  the  institutions,  bodies,  offices,  and  agencies  of  the  Union  shall  in  relation 
to  the  United  Kingdom,  and  natural  and  legal  persons  residing  or  established  in  the  territory  of 
the  United  Kingdom,  have  the  powers  conferred  upon  them  by  Union  law.  In  particular,  the 
Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall  have  jurisdiction  as  provided  for  in  the  Treaties  in 
this  respect. 
2.  Acts  of  the  institutions,  bodies,  offices,  and  agencies  adopted  in  accordance  with  paragraph  1 
shall  produce  in  respect  of  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  same  legal  effects  as  those  which  they 
produce  within  the  Union  and  its  Member  States. 
Chapter  V 
General  and  final  provisions 
Article  12 
Common  provisions 
1.  The  following  provisions  of  the  Withdrawal  Agreement  shall  apply  to  this  Protocol: 
(a)   Article  2,  the  first  subparagraph  of  Article  4(1)  and  Article  4(2)  and  (3),  Article  5(2)  and  (3) 
and  Article  6; 
(b)  Articles  100  and  104,  Article  105(1),  Articles  111,  115,  116  and  117  in  respect  of  activities 
of  the  Union  pursuant  to  this  Protocol; 
(c)  Part  Six,  without  prejudice  to  Article  11  of  this  Protocol. 
  For  the  purposes  of  this  Protocol,  any  reference  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  those  provisions  of  the 
Withdrawal  Agreement  shall  be  read  as  referring  to  the  United  Kingdom  or  the  United  Kingdom 
in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland,  as  the  case  may  be. 
2.  The  provisions  of  this  Protocol  referring  to  Union  law  or  concepts  or  provisions  thereof  shall  in 
their  implementation  and  application  be  interpreted  in  conformity  with  the  relevant  case  law  of 
the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union. 
3.  Where  this  Protocol  makes  reference  to  a  Union  act,  and  where  that  act  is  amended  or  replaced 
after  the  entry  into  force  of  the  Withdrawal  Agreement,  the  reference  to  that  act  shall  be  read  as 
referring  to  it  as  amended  or  replaced. 
114       
114      
The  Joint  Committee  shall  periodically  revise  the  relevant  references  in  this  Protocol  upon 
proposal  from  the  Specialised  Committee  set  up  under  this  Protocol. 
4.  By  way  of  derogation  from  point  (a)  of  paragraph  1  of  this  Article  and  from  Article  6  of  the 
Withdrawal  Agreement,  representatives  or  experts  of  the  United  Kingdom  or  experts  designated 
by  the  United  Kingdom  may,  upon  invitation  and  on  an  case-­‐by-­‐case  basis,  exceptionally  attend 
meetings  or  parts  of  meetings  of  the  committees  referred  to  in  Article  3(2)  of  Regulation  (EU) 
No  182/2011  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 146 ,  of  Commission  expert  groups,  of 
other  similar  entities,  or  of  bodies,  offices  or  agencies  where  and  when  representatives  or 
experts  of  the  Member  States  or  experts  designated  by  Member  States  take  part,  provided  that 
one  the  following  conditions  is  fulfilled: 
(a)   the  discussion  concerns  individual  acts  to  be  addressed  during  the  period  of  application 
of  this  Protocol  to  the  United  Kingdom  or  to  natural  or  legal  persons  residing  or 
established  in  the  United  Kingdom; 
(b)    the  presence  of  the  United  Kingdom  is  necessary  and  in  the  interest  of  the  Union,  in 
particular  for  the  effective  implementation  of  Union  law  made  applicable  by  this 
Protocol. 
During  such  meetings  or  parts  of  meetings,  the  representatives  or  experts  of  the  United  Kingdom 
or  experts  designated  by  it  shall  have  no  voting  rights  and  their  presence  shall  be  limited  to  the 
specific  agenda  items  that  fulfil  the  conditions  set  out  in  point  (a)  or  (b). 
5.  Authorities  of  the  United  Kingdom  shall  not  act  as  leading  authority  for  risk  assessments, 
examinations,  approvals  and  authorisation  procedures  provided  for  in  Union  law  made 
applicable  by  this  Protocol. 
6.  The  provisions  of  Union  law  on  the  protection  of  personal  data  referred  to  in  Article  66  of  the 
Withdrawal  Agreement  shall  apply  in  respect  of  personal  data  processed  in  the  United  Kingdom 
on  the  basis  of  this  Protocol. 
7.  Articles  346  and  347  TFEU  shall  apply  to  this  Protocol  as  regards  measures  taken  by  a  Member 
State  or  by  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland. 
Article  13 
Safeguards 
1.   If  the  application  of  this  Protocol  leads  to  serious  economic,  societal  or  environmental  difficulties 
liable  to  persist,  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom  may  unilaterally  take  appropriate  measures. 
Such  safeguard  measures  shall  be  restricted  with  regard  to  their  scope  and  duration  to  what  is 
strictly  necessary  in  order  to  remedy  the  situation.  Priority  shall  be  given  to  such  measures  as  will 
least  disturb  the  functioning  of  this  Protocol. 
2.   If  a  safeguard  measure  taken  by  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom,  as  the  case  may  be,  in 
accordance  with  paragraph  1  creates  an  imbalance  between  the  rights  and  obligations  under  this 
Protocol,  the  Union  or  the  United  Kingdom,  as  the  case  may  be,  may  take  such  proportionate 
                                                            
146  
Regulation  (EU)  No  182/2011  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  16  February  2011 
laying  down  the  rules  and  general  principles  concerning  mechanisms  for  control  by  Member  States  of 
the  Commission’s  exercise  of  implementing  powers  (OJ  L55,  28.2.2011,  p.  13). 
115       
115      
rebalancing  measures  as  are  strictly  necessary  to  remedy  the  imbalance.  Priority  shall  be  given  to 
such  measures  as  will  least  disturb  the  functioning  of  this  Protocol. 
3.  Safeguard  and  rebalancing  measures  taken  in  accordance  with  paragraphs  1  and  2  shall  be 
governed  by  the  procedures  and  dispute  settlement  arrangements  set  out  in  Annex  3  to  this 
Protocol.
Article  14 
Protection  of  financial  interests  
The  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  shall  counter  fraud  and  any  other  illegal  activities  affecting  the 
financial  interests  of  the  Union  or  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect  of  Northern  Ireland. 
Article  15 
Subsequent  agreement 
Should  a  subsequent  agreement  between  the  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  which  addresses  the 
unique  circumstances  on  the  island  of  Ireland,  avoids  a  hard  border  and  protects  the  1998 
Agreement  in  all  its  dimensions,  become  applicable  after  the  entry  into  force  of  the  Withdrawal 
Agreement,  this  Protocol  shall  not  apply  or  shall  cease  to  apply,  as  the  case  may  be,  in  whole  or  in 
part,  from  the  date  of  application  of  such  subsequent  agreement  and  in  accordance  with  that 
agreement.